5202
yaM
41
]OR.sc[
1v80190.5052:viXra
Air-Ground Collaboration for
Language-Specified Missions in
Unknown Environments
Fernando Cladera*1, Zachary Ravichandran*1, Jason Hughes*1, Varun Murali1, Carlos
Nieto-Granda2, M. Ani Hsieh1, George J. Pappas1, Camillo J. Taylor1, and Vijay Kumar1
1GRASPLaboratory,UniversityofPennsylvania,Philadelphia,Pennsylvania
2U.S.DEVCOMArmyResearchLaboratory(ARL),Adelphi,Maryland
∗EqualContribution
Correspondingauthors:FernandoCladera(fclad@seas.upenn.edu),ZacharyRavichandran(zacravi@seas.upenn.edu),
andJasonHughes(jasonah@seas.upenn.edu).
WegratefullyacknowledgethesupportofARLDCISTCRAW911NF-17-2-0181,NIFAgrant2022-67021-36856,theIoT4AgEngineering
ResearchCenterfundedbytheNationalScienceFoundation(NSF)underNSFCooperativeAgreementNumberEEC-1941529,NVIDIA,
andtheNSFGraduationResearchFellowshipProgram.
ABSTRACT As autonomous robotic systems become increasingly mature, users will want to
specify missions at the level of intent rather than in low-level detail. Language is an expressive
and intuitive medium for such mission specification. However, realizing language-guided robotic
teamsrequiresovercomingsignificanttechnicalhurdles.Interpretingandrealizinglanguage-specified
missions requires advanced semantic reasoning. Successful heterogeneous robots must effectively
coordinate actions and share information across varying viewpoints. Additionally, communication
betweenrobotsistypicallyintermittent,necessitatingrobuststrategiesthatleveragecommunication
opportunities to maintain coordination and achieve mission objectives. In this work, we present a
first-of-its-kind system where an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) and an unmanned ground vehicle
(UGV) are able to collaboratively accomplish missions specified in natural language while reacting
to changes in specification on the fly. We leverage a Large Language Model (LLM)-enabled planner
to reason over semantic-metric maps that are built online and opportunistically shared between an
aerialandagroundrobot.Weconsidertask-drivennavigationinurbanandruralareas.Oursystem
must infer mission-relevant semantics and actively acquire information via semantic mapping. In
both ground and air-ground teaming experiments, we demonstrate our system on seven different
natural-language specifications at up to kilometer-scale navigation.
INDEX TERMS AI-Enabled Robotics; Field Robots; Human-Robot Collaboration; Multi-Robot
Systems; Search and Rescue Robots; Semantic Scene Understanding; Task Planning.
I. INTRODUCTION offresolutionforaltitudeandflyhigherwhenafastscene
Exploration of unknown unstructured environments is overview is required. Moreover, high-altitude UAVs can
one of the quintessential field robotics applications, with actasobstacle-freecommunicationnodes,achievingline-
applications to infrastructure inspection [1], search and of-sight with other nodes on the ground. Unfortunately,
rescue [2], disaster response [3], law enforcement [4], and the low size, weight, and power (SWaP) constraints on
crop inspection [5], among others. Heterogeneous teams UAVs restrict the payload, compute, and operation time
ofaerialandgroundrobotshaveadistinctadvantagefor of UAVs. Contrarily, UGVs are not affected by these
fast exploration missions, by providing complementary power limitations: they can carry heavier payloads and
capabilities compared to a team of identical robots. operate for extended periods. However, UGVs speed is
Forexample,UAVsflyingathighaltitudesmoveinan limited as they have to plan trajectories to avoid static
obstacle-free space; thus, they can achieve higher speeds and dynamic obstacles and consider the traversability of
and provide an elevated vantage point. UAVs can trade the terrain where they operate.
Cladera*,Ravichandran*,Hughes*etal.:Air-GroundCollaborationforLanguage-SpecifiedMissionsinUnknownEnvironments
(3) Answer to ground robot:
Here is a preliminary version
of the aerial graph with your
requested objects.
Reasoning: I need to look for
barrels in this area.
(1) Inferred semantics: I’ll look
for [barrels, people, …]. (2) Request to UAV: (4) Planning on road
map looking for
Can you look for
[barrels, people].
[barrels, people]?
(5) Search for ground robot to
update map. Here is an updated
version of the aerial graph.
(7) Found a barrel. Reporting
(6) Update local graph with
this finding to the operator.
new information from UAV.
Replan on new roads looking
for [barrels, people].
FIGURE1. Examplemissionspecification.TheUAVandUGVsstarttheirmissioninthesamelocation.TheUGVscantasktheUAVwithalistoflabelsto
lookfor.Onceitreceivesagraph,theUGVscanplanontheUAVmap,lookingforobjectsofinterest.Satelliteimageinthebackgroundisonlyprovidedfor
representationpurposes.
Liu et al. [6] identified different roles UAVs and UGVs and step-by-step instructions. Given a user’s mission
perform in a team, such as sensor, actuator or auxiliary. specification, the robot team would infer the required
We focus on applications where UAVs and UGVs subtasks, reason about each platform’s constraints and
act cooperatively to perform a mission. However, abilities,andexecuteaplansuitedtotheenvironmentof
in most examples of the literature [6], the tasks are operation. Realizing this vision on robotic systems, and
pre-defined for the robots. For instance, UAVs may be particularly air-ground robotics, remains a significant
used for to localize ground robots [7] or generate maps challenge. Existing literature generally assumes mission
and traversability information [8]. Miller et al. [9] were specifications are fixed. Creating planners that reason
one of the first to use UAVs in a multi-role setting, overdynamicmissionspecifications,wherenotaskispre-
where the UAV generated a map and acted as an active specified on either the aerial or ground vehicle, remains
communication relay [10]. an open research question. Correspondingly, existing
Still, the state of the art is far from a seamless literature fix semantics upfront or only share metric
collaboration of aerial and ground robots, where tasks information among robots. However, dynamically con-
are not pre-encoded. For example, leading systems in figuring semantics is a desirable property. Finally, robot
the DARPA SubT challenge, including Nebula [11] and mobility should not be limited by the communication
Cerberus [12], were designed for object search over a networkinfrastructure,androbotsshouldnotneedbein
specificsemanticset.Recentliteratureproposesplanners continuous communication range. Creating robot teams
for language-specified tasks in single-robot, small-scale, that leverage fully opportunistic communications is an
structured environments (e.g., indoors) [13]–[15]. How- ongoing challenge.
ever, such work assumes favorable conditions, including This work builds upon our air-ground collaboration
near-perfectenvironmentknowledgeandperfectcommu- work[8],[9],includingcomponentsofopportunisticcom-
nications [16]. munication [10] and language-driven planning [17]. We
As autonomous robotic systems become increasingly aim to address the challenges posed in [18] by proposing
mature, we envision a heterogeneous robotic team that a language-driven air-ground teaming system with the
users can task at the level of intent rather than detailed following novel contributions:
• The first air-ground teaming system for language- mapsaresimilarbutdonotincludeahierarchy[28],[29].
specified missions in unknown environments. Recent work incorporates foundation models into map-
• A decentralized and compact semantic mapping ap- pingpipelinestocreateopen-vocabularyrepresentations.
proach that enables the UAV and UGVs to share Mappers, including ConceptGraphs [30], HOVSG [14],
observations and dynamically set mission-relevant and Clio [31], assign semantic feature vectors to entities
semantics of interest to map. in the map. Semantic labels are then produced at run-
We performed experimental validation and system de- time, depending on the task.
ployment in kilometer-scale experiments in semi-urban Effectiverepresentationsformulti-robotteamingshare
and rural environments. An example mission scenario is manyoftheaforementionedproperties.Oneofthemajor
shown in Fig. 1. The supplementary material for this additional challenges is that they require a consistent
work is available online1. frame between robots. Consistent multi-robot state esti-
mation is addressed by works such as Kimera-multi [32].
Similarly,Hydra-Multibuildsscenegraphsacrossarobot
II. RELATED WORK
team via loop-closure detection and relative state esti-
A. Air-ground Robot Teaming
mation[33].Alternatively,theSPOMPsystemaddresses
Cooperative air-ground collaboration in robotics has
thisproblemwithasemantics-basedrelativelocalization
more than twenty years of development [6]. The initial
module[9].However,thisapproachrequiresanorthomap
works of Elfes et al. used robotics blimps to transmit
to be constructed in real time and transmitted to the
aerial images to ground robots, which used them for
ground robots. Sparsity is another desirable property, as
visual navigation [19]. Other early works also use aerial
communication and compute may be limited, which this
vehicles for localization, tracking, and obstacle avoid-
work addresses.
ance [7], [20], [21]. In these works, the UAV acts as an
This work introduces a sparse map representa-
eye in the sky, providing information that compliments
tionsharedbytheUAVandUGV.Wedemonstrate
ground robot knowledge. One of the first examples of
howtheUAVcanbuildthemapinreal-timeandhowthe
air-ground mapping is described in [3] and [22], where
UGV can use such representation to execute its mission
a team of robots was deployed to assess the damages
while augmenting it with newly observed information.
of historical buildings after earthquakes in Italy and
Japan. These works proved the potential of air-ground
teamsindisasterscenariosbyreducingtheriskofrescue C. Language-specified mission planning
personnel. Motivated by the increasing maturity and accessibility
Most existing air-ground robot teaming literature fo- of LLMs, the robotics community has studied the use
cusesonstatictaskassignments,wheretherobots’tasks of language for specifying tasks and missions. LLM-
are pre-agreed. For example, the UAV provides aerial enabledplannershavebeendevelopedformobilemanip-
information for mapping or obstacle avoidance. In some ulation [13], [16], [34], service robotics [35], autonomous
works [9], [10], the UAV has multiple roles as a map driving[36],navigation[37]–[40],andfaultdetection[41],
provider and communication relay. Still, few works show [42] These methods typically configure a pre-trained
an explicit tasking of the UAV-UGV team. In this LLM, such as GPT-4 [43], via in-context prompts. This
work, we aim to address this issue by allowing approachavoidsfine-tuningorretraininganLLM,which
the UGV to task the UAV towards an integrated is computationally expensive, but it still channels the
semantic exploration task. LLM’s common sense into a specific problem [44]. The
LLM-enabled planner is then provided a set of behav-
B. Semantic Representations for Navigation iors such as graph navigation goals [36], predicates in
Semantic planning requires representations that contain a formal planning language [15], lower-level APIs for
the contextual information for high-level planning and code generation [45]–[47], or learned behaviors [13]. At
traversability information for lower-level control. The runtime, the LLM is given an environment map, such as
perception community has advanced online semantic a graph [16] or semantic regions [44]. A line of research
planning for tasks such as active exploration and object plans over formal languages such as Linear Temporal
search[9],[23]–[25].Mostofthesemanticmappinglitera- Logic (LTL) or Planning Domain Definition Language
turefocusesonsingle-robotapplications.Intheseworks, (PDDL) [15], [48]–[53]. Recent literature also considers
scene graphs have emerged as a popular representation language-specifiedmissionsformulti-robotsystems[54]–
forsemanticplanning,astheycaptureobjects,topology, [58].However,theseworksconsidercontrolledsimulation
andtraversableregions.Hydraprovidesareal-timescene or closed-world manipulation environments with perfect
graph engine [26] designed for indoor environments. or near-perfect environment knowledge.
Strader et al. [27] relax this assumption. Topological In the above approaches, instructions typically state
therequiredsubtasksandrequiredsemantics[59].While
1http://tfr-air-ground.fcladera.com works such as SayPlan consider less well-specified tasks
Cladera*,Ravichandran*,Hughes*etal.:Air-GroundCollaborationforLanguage-SpecifiedMissionsinUnknownEnvironments
Low-level planner
Sensors Map Rece S d u i b n t g a h sk o s rizon Validated Global planner in
Shu G t l t o e b r a R l G B Gro D u IN nd O ing Segm M SA e o M n d t e 2 a l tion c e o s o t U i r m T di M a n t a o t r e Con G s r t a ru p c h t ion updates P L la L n M G -e e n n a e b ra le t d o r Plan Validator subtasks semantic graph
Feedback Move_base local
IMU Aerial graph construction Localizer SPINE planner
GPS Jac c k o a n l t l r o o w ll - e le r vel
Mission-driven
semantic
Robot Semantic Semantic configuration Robot
Hardware Graph Graph Hardware
Sensors
Ex
m
p
i
l
s
o
s
ra
io
ti
n
on Otracvceurpsaanbcilyit yM easptpiminagt ivoina LiDAR
P C X o 4 n t F ro li l g le h r t Communication w P a r y e p d o e i fi n n t e s d e t Output pro G c r e a s p s h i ng oa Opneb dnj e-mvcou t cl L ta ti o rpb a c lu ce al k- lah i e zryr ya p tdo ioeth ntee vcs ita ios r Odometry GPS
mission Aerial
air_router graph Mapper SVeimsiaonnt iLca Dnegsucargipe tMioond: evila RGB+D
UGV MOCHA MOCHA
odometry Aerial Odometry
Label set tran R s O la S t o rs graph tran R s O la S t o rs Label set
Distributed Distributed
Falcon 4 UAV database database Jackal UGV
Physical Network
FIGURE2. Systemoverview.GreenlinesrepresentinformationthatistransmittedtoandfromMOCHAandthusarecommunicatedtootherrobotsinthe
system.
(“find me something to drink”), they still assume pre- Rendezvousapproachesrelyonestablishedguarantees
mapped or highly-structured indoor scenes [16], [34]. forcommunicationasrobotsphysicallymeettoexchange
Other research relaxes the requirement of a pre-built information [63], [64]. Alternatively, robots can form
semanticmapbyincorporatingfeedbackfromperception continuous communication networks and venture out to
systems [34], [41], [44] or specifying semantics at run- areas without communications [65], [66], with success-
time [59], [60]. However, perception is limited to object ful application in underground mapping at the SubT
detection or designed for small room-centric environ- challenge.Still,thesetechniqueslimitmobilitywhenthe
mentswheretheplannercanleverageclearhierarchyand number of robots is reduced.
natural bounds on the environment. In [9], [10], we introduced MOCHA, a fully oppor-
We recently introduced the SPINE planning architec- tunistic communication approach for air-ground teams.
ture,whichservesasthebaseofourUGVplanner[17].In MOCHA is based on a gossip communication ap-
contrast to the above works, SPINE reasons over under- proach[67],thatenableslarge-scaleexploration,ascom-
specified missions where the user provides high-level municationconstraintsdonotlimitrobotoperations.To
intent. Furthermore, the environment is only partially- avoid robots in isolated situations, the aerial robot acts
known or unknown at runtime, so the system must as a data mule, finding ground robots and physically
actively acquire task-relevant information. Compared carrying data from them. We showed that MOCHA
to our previous work, we extend SPINE to enable performs well in large-scale environments, in simula-
taskingtheUAV,allowingittogenerateabetterprior tion and real-world experiments. This work leverages
for the UGV mission. MOCHA for communication between the robots,
and for the communication-aware planner of the
D. Multi-robot communications UAV.
Communication in air-ground teams can be broadly
grouped into three groups: a) ensured network connec- E. Robot teaming with human in the loop
tivity, b) rendezvous approaches, and c) opportunistic Human-in-the-loop frameworks have become pivotal in
communication. Ensured network communication ap- improvingrobotteamingbyintegratinghumanoversight
proaches focus on deploying a group of robots such that and domain-specific tasking into multi-robot systems.
there is guaranteed communication between all network Measuringtheefficacyofhuman-robotteaminghasbeen
nodes [61], [62]. Continuous communication approaches studied extensively in [68]–[70]. Specifically, Novitzky et
arekeywhenahumanoperatorisrequiredintheloopor al. uses the game “capture the flag” in [68] and [71] to
when robots need to report to a centralized base station assess effective ways to task robot teammates. Robot
continuously. The main disadvantage of this approach teams with humans in-the-loop have been developed in
is that the experiment area is limited by the commu- [72]–[74]forvariousinspectiontasks.Alloftheserelyon
nication channel quality, and it can be severely limited predefining what is to be inspected before the system is
in environments with non-line-of-sight (LOS) between running by hard-coding in [74] or predefining semantic
robots. labels as in [73]. All of these systems lack the ability
C. Communications
Producer Name Messagetype Size
The list of messages transmitted by each robot over
UGV UGV_odometry Posestamped 74B MOCHA is described in Tab. 1, with a representative
UGV label_set String(JSON) 2B size for each compressed message 10 minutes after the
UAV aerial_graph String(JSON) 40.2KB start of the mission.
TABLE1. MessagestransmittedbetweenrobotsusingMOCHA,ouroppor- We used Rajant [78] breadcrumb radios for our phys-
tunisticcommunicationsframework,after10minutesofanexperiment. ical communication layer which MOCHA runs on top
of. Robots use the Rajant DX-2 and Cardinal radios,
for the human to re-task the robot team on the fly like whereas the base station runs a FE1 radio. The Rajant
our system can. Prior work has used different interfaces BreadcrumbAPIisusedtoobtaininformationregarding
tointeractwiththerobotteam,includingmapinterfaces the link quality, such as the received signal strength
[75]thatallowforgotocommandsorsearchcommands, indicator (RSSI). This information is used to trigger a
and virtual reality [76] and gesture control [77], which communication exchange between two robots.
allow for advanced teleoperation of the robot. These We also deployed dummy ME4 nodes to act as com-
interfaces require more input from the human-in-the- munication relays for LLM API calls for SPINE. These
loop, which means the robot system is making fewer nodes do not participate actively in the opportunistic
decisions.Alloftheseinterfacesfailtobeasexpressiveas communication process.
natural language for the human as our implementation
of large language models in a human-robot team. In
IV. METHODOLOGY
comparison, we present the first heterogeneous
This section describes the components running onboard
teamingsystemwithahumanintheloopcapable
theUAVandUGVandhowtheycomplementeachother.
of interacting through natural language.
A key component of the approach is to use an open-
set semantic-metricmapthatcanbesharedbetweenthe
robots (compact communication) and efficiently supply
III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
updates in a structured format to the LLM-based deci-
A. Mission specification
sion maker. The core representation used by SPINE on
This section describes the overall system architecture
theUGVsisasemantic-topologicalgraph.Asiscommon
and mission specification using language as depicted in
in the semantic mapping literature, each node is either
Fig. 1. A human operator requests assistance with a
a region or an object. Regions are traversable points
particulartaskfromoneormoreUGVs,whichinfersthe
in freespace [14], [26]. An edge between two regions
semanticsinthescenethatneedtobefound.TheUGVs
indicates that there is an obstacle-free path. Localized
also infers a list of labels that it will request the UAV to
objectsarerepresentedasobjectnodes.Anedgebetween
search for, in addition to traversable classes, like paved
an object and a region node indicates that the object
roads.
can be observed from that region. Regions and objects
The UAV then produces an initial graph with
may be enriched with additional semantic information
traversable regions and objects of interest, which is in-
crementally transmitted through MOCHA to the UGVs.
New labels can be added on-demand by the UGV and
senttotheUAV.TheUAValsoactsasacommunication
relay,carryingmessagesbetweenthedifferentrobotsand
the operators if needed.
Once a graph has been received, the UGVs plan a tra-
jectory using the graph to objects of interest. If objects
arefound,theyarereportedtotheoperator.Ourcurrent
system can run as many ground robots as required, but
no coordination occurs between them. Additionally, we
canpre-generateapartialenvironmentgraphusingother
data sources, such as satellite images.
B. System architecture
A system overview is presented in Fig. 2. The different
sub-components are described in Sec. IV. We use a
FIGURE3. UAVMappingsystemwithdynamicinputfromtheUGV.(1)A
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) to establish
userdefinesataskwhichispassedtotheSPINEplanner.(2)TheSPINE
the positions of the different robots, as well as to anno- PlannerassignstheUAVsemanticclassestolookfor.(3)TheUAVmapper
tate the coordinates of the nodes in the graph. parsesthedetectionsfromGroundedSAM2toproduceamap.(4)Themap
issharedwiththeUGVs.
Cladera*,Ravichandran*,Hughes*etal.:Air-GroundCollaborationforLanguage-SpecifiedMissionsinUnknownEnvironments
FIGURE4. Anexampleofthegeneratedsemantic-metricmapfromtheaerialrobotisshownatdifferentmappingiterationsoverlayedonMapbox[79]
satelliteimagery.Theestimatedtraversablegraphisshowninblueandthesemantics(inthisexampleorange barrel)isshowningreen.Left:Mapping
iteration=4,Center:Mappingiteration=12;Right:Mappingiteration=25.
(e.g., thisbridgeisblockedbyavehicle),whichprovides Performance vs Compute Tradeoffs. Our system
additional context for planning. Both UGV and UAV allows for abstract task specifications. This underspeci-
mappingapproachesuseGroundingDINO[80]todetect fied nature can result in several objects of interest being
objects of interest and incorporate information into the identified for mapping. We notice empirically that when
map to account for their particular visual and compute smaller objects need to be detected that are harder
capabilities, which are described in the following sec- to see from the air, the memory requirements of the
tions. detection model exceeds the available memory. In this
case, we optionally use a smaller segmentation module
A. UAV Semantic Mapper SlimSAM [85] to ensure that the compute stays within
This module is designed to build an object-centric se- budget. We note that this will result in noisy locations
mantic map that is grounded in a common frame of of objects being added to the graph but the UGV can
reference. It also maintains a region network of the use it’s additional compute capabilities to verify and
environment that the UGVs can use for global planning. correctthegraphwhilestillingestingacoarseprior.The
ThecomponentsoftheUAVsemanticmapperareshown implicationsofthistradeoffisdiscussedinSec.IV.Band
in Fig. 3, and an example of such a map is shown in demonstrated in Sec. VI.
Fig. 4. For the purpose of this work, we assume that the
Graph Construction.Giventhedetections,theobject
traversablecomponentfortheUGVsisthesemanticclass
coordinates are estimated by applying a distance trans-
road.Still,oursystemcanhandleotherclassesifdesired
form on their associated pixel centroids. Each object is
or required by the operation environment or mission.
assigned the furthest point from the mask boundary as
Atthestartofeachmission,thesetoflabelsiscommu-
its coordinate. The pixel coordinates are then converted
nicated to the aerial robot using MOCHA. The mapper
to UTM for a pre-specified origin with known camera
then listens for images and their associated GNSS loca-
intrinsics. To construct a region graph we use road
tion and orientation from a custom GNSS/INS system.
as the semantic class. We first take the largest road
Localization. From our past work [8], [81], a major mask in each image and only add a region node if
challenge in building useful aerial maps is the quality of the mask is more than 20% of the image. We also use
orientation estimation and synchronization between the the class building and car as negative objects, i.e.
imageryandtheodometry.Inhighwindscenarioswhere objectsthatwedonotreport.Withoutthemthenetwork
the UAV may maintain a significant pitch, localized often misclassifies buildings and cars as road, leading to
pointsintheimageprojectedontothegroundplanemay untraversableedgesinthegraph.Thesefilteringmethods
be incorrect by several meters. We use GTSAM [82] to helps reduce the number of misclassifications of other
fuse GNSS coordinates and IMU data to get a high rate objects in the scene as roads. When there is a large
stateestimatebetweenGNSSreadings.Thisallowsusto road segment we compute the same distance transform
get an accurate pose for each image. Further details on as before and assign the road point to the furthest point
the implementation can be found in the Appendix. A.3 fromthemaskboundary.Thispointisthentransformed
Object Detection and Masking. We use Grounded to UTM coordinates and added to the region graph
SAM2 [83] for aerial object detections because of its network by connecting it to the nearest region node.
zero-shotopen-setperformance,evenonaerialdata.The This pipeline is shown in Fig. 3 and results of the aerial
model uses Grounding DINO [80] for open-set object semantic graph are shown in Fig. 4.
detection and SAM2 [84] for accurate segmentation of
theobjects.Weuseabaseandlargemodel,respectively, B. UGV Semantic Mapper
which combine to 12 GB of VRAM, with a latency of 3 TheUGVmapperalsomaintainsalocaloccupancymap,
to5secondswhenrunningonboardtheUAV,depending which the planner uses for free space exploration. The
on how many objects are detected. semantic graph constructed by the UAV provides an
initial map estimate (see Sec. IV A), and the UAV can
User
iteratively provide map updates during the mission.
OurUGVsemanticmappingimplementationisshown
(5) Answer User
(1) Task: I need
in Fig. 2. The mapper takes RGB + Depth, LiDAR, to get across answer(I found a car in
town quickly. the parking lot)
and semantic configuration as inputs. LiDAR is used
for odometry estimation (Faster-LIO [86]) and local (4) Perception Update
occupancy map construction (GroundGrid [87]). The add_node(car) (3) Mobility and active
SPINE sensing
occupancy map is used to add and remove regions and explore_region
(2) Active Sensing (parking_lot)
edges from the map based on connectivity. RGB+D
set_labels(car)
is used for object localization and captioning. Objects
are detected using GroundingDino [80]). Detections are
then clustered and localized with a multiple-hypothesis Mapper Controller
tracker. A vision-language model (LLaVA [88]) enriches
the semantic information available to the planner (see
Fig. 10). Outputs from these modules are used to add
and remove nodes and enrich them with semantic in-
formation. A Semantic configuration is provided by the FIGURE5. ExampleAPIuseduringmission.(1)userspecifiesamission.
(2)SPINEinfersrelevantsemanticcategoriesandconfiguresperception
plannerandisusedtosetthelabelsoftheobjectdetector
labels.(3)SPINEthenreasonsaboutexplorationtargets.(4)Perception
and provide queries to the vision language model. The findsacarandnotifiesplanner.(5)Plannerinformsuser.
detectionandtrackingmodulesrunat∼5Hz,thevision-
historyaremaintainedin-contextviatheprovidedAPIs.
language model runs at ∼ 1Hz, and occupancy map
SeeFig.5foranexampleaction-control-perceptionloop.
construction runs well over 10Hz, all onboard.
Plan Validation. To create subtasks, the planner must
correctlyinvokeitsbehaviorlibrarywhilereasoningover
C. SPINE Planning
constraints such as traversability. Since LLMs are prone
The backbone planner used in this work is based on
to hallucinate this information, we filter LLM-generated
SPINE, first presented in [17]. This section summarizes
plans through a validation module, which ensures all
some of the key ideas relevant to teaming.
plans are syntactically correct and physically realizable.
SPINE’s plan generator uses an LLM to infer a task
Ifagiventaskisinvalid,thevalidatorformsstate-specific
sequencefromamissionspecificationandsemanticmap.
feedback to the LLM. While this validation procedure
We configure a pre-trained LLM via a system prompt
provides valuable planning safeguards, the spatial con-
with three components: role description, the mapping
straints are contingent on perception.
interface, and a description of the behavior library.
Online Map Correction. SPINE uses prior semantic
Mapping Interface. The mapping interface provides a graphs constructed from a UAV or satellite image. Such
textual representation of the semantic graph. The plan priors offer valuable contextual and traversability infor-
generator first receives a JSON representation of the mation, however they may contain spurious traversabil-
graph.Then,ateachplanningiteration,allmapupdates ity edges. Identifying such errors online so that SPINE
are provided to the LLM in-context via the following canreplanisvitaltoarobustautonomysolution.SPINE
API, which captures high-level graph manipulations: thus uses feedback from the downstream controllers to
add_nodes, remove_nodes, add_edges, remove_edges, infer spurious edges and remove them from the graph. If
andupdate_nodes.Thenodesaredefinedasadictionary SPINEsendsanavigationcommand acrossanedgethat
of attributes, which allows for providing nodes with rich thecontrollercannottraverse,SPINEremovesthatedge
semantic descriptions (example in Fig. 12). from the graph.
PlanGeneration.SPINEcomposesplansviabehaviors D. Mission Execution
fornavigation,activemapping,anduserinteraction.The The UAV is tasked with an initial exploration mission
LLM generates a receding horizon behavior sequence at over the area of interest. For our experiments, a pre-
each planning iteration, and this sequence is provided to defined waypoint set is provided to avoid flying over
thevalidationmodule.An“answer”behaviorterminates unsafe regions in the area. However, waypoints can be
a mission and notifies the user of results, and a “clarify” generated with any coverage algorithm.
behavior is used to gain further instructions, if needed. After a timer t has elapsed, the UAV transitions into
i
Weenforcechain-of-thoughreasoningbyrequiringthe search and communication modes, looking for ground
LLM to provide a justification for each action sequence, robots to transmit the graph. The last known pose is
which reduces hallucinations or otherwise ungrounded used as a heuristic for where to find the ground robot.
behavior [89]. All inputs to the planner and action Once the ground robot has been found and all the
Cladera*,Ravichandran*,Hughes*etal.:Air-GroundCollaborationforLanguage-SpecifiedMissionsinUnknownEnvironments
strate air-ground teaming in unknown environments
Controller
given language-specified missions, in controlled settings
Controller
navigate towards (Sec V.C).
goal
goto(road_1)
Platforms. We used the Falcon 4 [90] as our UAV
platform. The UAV is controlled by a flight controller
running PX4 firmware [91]. The primary sensors are
Controller tries to
navigate around a Blackfly S U3-32S4C-C RGB global-shutter camera,
obstacles
and a VectorNav VN-100-T inertial measurement unit
SPINE
(IMU). The platform uses a U-blox ZED F9P GNSS
sensor for localization. Finally, all the data is processed
If unsuccessful, by an onboard Nvidia Jetson Orin NX.
edge is removed
Our UGV platform consists of a Clearpath Jackal
Feedback: Could not traverse edge.
Path must be blocked equipped with an AMD Ryzen 3600 CPU with 32 GB
API Update:
remove_egdge([road_1, road_0]) of RAM and an Nvidia RTX 4000 Ada SFF GPU. An
Ouster OS1-64 LiDAR is used for obstacle avoidance,
FIGURE6. Examplemapcorrection.SPINEattemptstotraverseaninvalid path planning, and odometry, while a ZED 2i stereo
edge(greenline).Greenpointsdenotegroundandredpointsdenote camera provides sensing for object detection. We also
obstacles.Thecontrollercannotfindatrajectoryaroundtheobstacle,andit
use a U-blox ZED-F9P GNSS to record the initial po-
timesoutafterapre-specifiedduration.Theincorrectedgeisremovedfrom
thegraph,andthatfeedbackissenttoSPINE. sition of the UGV, which establishes a common refer-
ence frame with the overhead graph. Finally, we use a
Vectornav VN-100 for global heading corrections. More
detailsaboutthehardwareplatformscanbefoundinthe
Appendix.
Environments. We perform Ground Autonomy exper-
iments in two rural environments termed Bucker and
Range 15, shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11, respectively.
Eachenvironmentstressesauniquecomponentoftheau-
tonomystack.Range15islargeandsemanticallysparse.
We use this environment to evaluate the autonomy’s
reasoning over long-horizon missions, state estimation,
andcommunicationsatscale.Bucknerissmallerinscale
FIGURE7. Exampleimagesofthedetectiononboardtheaerialrobotfor butfeaturesrichersemantics,suchasbridges,gates,and
thePennovationexperiment,showingthequalityofthezero-shottransferto parking lots, all within a few hundred meters. Buckner
theaerialdata.TheredlineindicatetheflightpathoftheUAVoverlayed
experiments evaluate the UGV autonomy’s ability to
onMapbox[79]satelliteimagery.
reason over richer or ambiguous specifications.
data has been transmitted, the UAV transitions again We demonstrate the full air-ground system in Pen-
into exploration mode, covering all the waypoints in its novation, an urban office park with fields, buildings,
mission. parkinglots,andotherstructures.Wealsousedatafrom
OntheUGV,SPINEsendsnavigationsubtaskstothe these demonstrations to evaluate the aerial autonomy
low-level planner. These commands reference paths on performance.Allenvironmentswereuncontrolled.There
the semantic graph (note that exploration commands were dynamic entities such as cars and people moving
firstextendthesemanticgraph).Graphnavigationpaths during experiments, and the environments contained
are then sent to the ROS Move Base controller 2, which many obstacles, both positive (fences, walls) and neg-
plans trajectories realized by the Jackal controller. ative (ditches).
V. EXPERIMENTS A. Aerial Mapping
We evaluate our system over three sets of experiments. In this section, we evaluate the components of the UAV
We first evaluate the incremental graph construction of mapping system. The important qualities of our aerial
the Aerial Autonomy component of our system (Sec. maps are: 1) Resolution, task relevance, semantic de-
V A). We then evaluate the Ground Autonomy’s abil- tections; 2) Small size for transmission between robots;
ity to realize language-specified missions in partially- 3) Accurate estimate of the traversable portions of the
known environments (Sec. V.B). Finally, we demon- environment. We design experiments to measure the
effectiveness of our proposed method for these qualities.
2http://wiki.ros.org/move_base We first test the quality of the object detector, and we
Specification TotalDetections FalsePositives Precision Specification TotalDetections FalsePositives Precision
Pennovation1 708 127 82.1% Pennovation1 82 9 89.0%
Pennovation2 388 59 84.8% Pennovation2 24 2 91.6%
TABLE 2. Performance of the aerial object detection module based on TABLE3. Performanceofthetraversableedgedetectionmodule.
GroundedSAM2,zero-shottransfer.
aerial semantic graph generated by the UAV compared
to the previously used dense maps.
then measure the size of the stored maps relative to the
distance traveled.
Traversability Estimation. Finally, to measure the
quality of the estimated road network, we manually
Object Detections. To evaluate our object detection
annotate the true positives and false positives in the
module, we manually annotate the desired objects in 2
detected roads. The results of this analysis are shown
ofourdatasetsandevaluatethefalsepositiverateofthe
in Table 3. These results are encouraging: accurate road
detector. The desired labels for this evaluation are task
maps improve the performance of the ground autonomy
specific to these datasets and are not the same across
stack.
bothdatasets.Theresultsofthisevaluationareshownin
Tab. 2. As shown, the object detector is able to perform
B. Ground Autonomy
remarkablywellwithzero-shottransfertoourdata.The
WeevaluatetheUGVautonomyplatformindependently
results are surprising considering the viewpoint of the
of the UAV. We design experiments to assess the UGV
UAV camera. The qualitative evaluation of the detected
autonomy’s ability to complete missions with differing
objects is shown in Fig. 7 & Fig. 8.
specifications, environments, and priors. In contrast to
Incremental Graph Construction. To evaluate the
the System Demonstration in Sec. V C and VI, we gen-
quality of the constructed graph, we show an example
eratethepriorsfromregisteredsatellitedata.Thepriors
of the incremental semantic-metric map generated by
contain traversability information and some relevant se-
the robot overlaid onto a satellite image in Fig. 4. An
mantics. However, the priors are imperfect and contain
advantage of our method is the size of the map that is
irrelevant information and mistakes that the UGV must
stored. We show in Fig. 9 that the maps are roughly
correct online. Our experiments evaluate the UGV’s
linear in the distance traveled, and areas of size 20,000
m2 can be stored in just kilobytes. ability to infer navigation, exploration, and information
acquisition goals from natural language specifications,
Compared to our previous work [8], [9], the messages
react to findings, and use findings to complete the user’s
transmittedbetweenrobotsaresignificantlysmaller.For
mission.
instance, the size of the uncompressed graph after flying
1000 m is approximately 12 to 17 KB, compared to
Experimental Setup. We consider five mission speci-
530 to 699 KB of the semantic map image generated
fications, as summarized in Table 4, and evaluate each
by ASOOM. These results showcase the efficiency of the
specification one to four times. We construct priors for
each environment; however, the priors are not designed
for a specific tasks. One of the primary purposes of the
103
102
101
100
10−1
0 500 1,000 1,500
FIGURE8. SemanticdetectionresultsforRange15,showingthezero-shot Distance (m)
transfercapabilitiesofGrounded-SAM2toaruralenvironment.Theread
lineshowstheflightpathoftheUAVoverlayedonMapbox[79]satellite
imagery.
)BK(
eziS
This work - Exp 1
This work - Exp 2
ASOOM [8] - Exp 2
ASOOM [8] - Exp 1
FIGURE9. Sizeoftheuncompressedmapasafunctionofthedistance
traveledbytheUAV.
Cladera*,Ravichandran*,Hughes*etal.:Air-GroundCollaborationforLanguage-SpecifiedMissionsinUnknownEnvironments
2
1 1
25m
100m 2
Communication nodes
FIGURE10. ExamplemissionfromS3.“Igotreportsthatthebridgewas
blocked.Gocheck.”TheUGVstartsitsmissionatthebottomleftofthe
FIGURE11. ExamplemissionfromS1.“Iheardofactivitynearthered
trajectory(1).TheUGVtheninfersanmappingtarget(bridge).After
houses.Gocheck.”Atthestart(1),theUGVidentifiesexplorationtargets
navigationandmapping,itidentifiesseveralobstaclesandreportsits
(redhouses,bottom)andnavigatestherefromitsstartlocation(2).The
findingstotheuser(2).
UGVsuccessfullyidentifiesseveralpeople.Thegroundvehicle
communicatesitsfindingsinrealtimeviatext.Itthenreturnstoitsstarting
locationtooffloadmissiondata.
priorwastokeeptherobotawayfromnegativeobstacles,
suchasditches,whichcouldnotbedetectedbytheUGV.
the UGV to return to the starting location to offload
Results and Discussion. We summarize the experi-
data. Overall the mission requires the UGV to traverse
mentalresultsforeachmissionspecificationinTab5.We
1200 meters, which test all layers of the autonomy stack
report mission success, distance traveled, and the num-
including the odometry and communication network.
ber of API calls. The number of API calls indicates how
SPINE uses active perception to resolve errors in the
many subtask steps SPINE inferred during its mission.
mission specification. Examples about active perception
The UGV was successful in achieving S2 through S5.
are presented in the Appendix.
There were two unsuccessful missions during S1, each of
which failed due to the large scale of the environment.
C. Air-Ground Teaming Evaluation
Inoneoutcome,agustofleavesblewaroundtheground
We evaluate the performance of our air-ground team-
vehicle’s LiDAR, which caused unrecoverable odometry
ing system as compared to single-UGV variants against
drift(seeFig.15).Inthesecond,theUGVlostcommuni-
language-specified missions in unknown environments.
cations and could not perform the LLM queries required
The first baseline (“UGV w/ GT”) receives a full
for planning.
map constructed from satellite imagery, which estimates
We highlight two emblematic missions. Fig. 10
upper-boundperformanceofthemissiongivenourUGV
shows the UGV trajectory from a mission with the
autonomy stack. The second baseline (“UGV”) receives
specification: “I heard the bridge was blocked. Can
no prior map, and this baseline must explore to accom-
you check?”. SPINE infers that the relevant seman-
plish the mission. We consider a triaging mission where
tics are bridge, car, truck, bicycle, pedestrian, con-
the system must respond to a chemical spill by inferring
struction cone, debris, and barrier. The planner then
relevant semantic (i.e., chemical barrels, people), map
navigates to the bridge by constructing the follow-
the relevant area, and report its findings. The system
ingplangoto(road_5), map_region(bridge_1).Upon
is given the specification “triage the chemical spill 100
mapping the bridge, SPINE discovers several obstacles,
includingaperson,car,andconstructionbarrier.SPINE
uses the VLM to get a more detailed description, as
shown in Fig. 12, and reasons over this information to VLM Query: You are a robot. Describe where you are so you can plan.
VLM Answer: Road with a silver car and a woman
respond “The path across the bridge is likely blocked
due to the presence of a construction cone and a person.
There is also a silver car and a woman on the bridge,
which may indicate a temporary blockage.”
Fig. 11 overviews a mission in which the UGV was
provided the task: “I heard of suspicious activity near
the red houses. Go check.” The UGV had red houses on
itspriormap,soitinfersaplantomapthose.Alongthe
way, it observes cars and people. Because those objects
are not near the red houses, the UGV records those in
its map but does not consider them as relevant to the FIGURE12. Intheaboveexample,thegroundvehiclemustlearnifthe
bridgeisblocked.Thegroundvehicle(Specification3).Thegroundvehicle’s
task. Finally, the UGV reaches the red houses, discovers
planner,SPINE,usesaVisionLanguageModelrunningonboardtoobtain
people,andreportsthemtotheuser.Theuserthenasks detailedsemanticinformationfortheuser.
Specification Location Priors Desiredoutcome
(S1)Iheardofactivitynearthered Range15 Redhouses.Noobjects Identityandreportseveralpeopleneartwo
houses.Gocheck redhouses.
(S2) Go inspect the black vehicle Range15 Black vehicle is at the begin- Planneridentifiesmisspecificationandcor-
attheendofthedriveway ningofthedriveway rectlyfindscar.
(S3) I got reports that the bridge Buckner Bridge,noblockage Planner identities vehicle blocking the
wasblocked.Gocheck. bridge
(S4)Isthereactivitynearthegate Buckner Gate,objects Planneridentifiesandreportsaperson
(S5) Identify the parking lot 30 Buckner Bridge,butnoparkinglot Plannerexplorecorrectareaandidentifies
meterseastofthebridge parkinglot
TABLE4. Missionspecifications,locationsandpriorsusedtotestthegroundautonomy.
meters X,” where X is a location prior. Note the system
Method Success(%) Dist.(m) Autonomous(%)
is not explicitly provided the relevant semantics (i.e.,
barrels);rather,itmustinfer.Werepeatthisexperiment UGV 0 54.9 94.6
threetimesforeachbaselineandsixtimesforoursystem, UAV-UGV 83.3 104.9 99.3
with location priors to the north and northeast. UGVw/GT 100 100.7 99.7
We report results in Table 6, as measured by success TABLE 6. Experiments with air-ground teaming compared to UGV-only
rate, distance traveled by the UGV, and the percentage methods.GTcorrespondstoapre-computedmapfromsatelliteimagery.
of time spent in autonomous mode. Unsurprisingly, the
UGV obtains a 100% success rate when given a full of the ground robots, the opportunistic communication,
prior map of the environments. Our system achieves an and the behavior of the air-ground team. Note that
83.3% success rate while spending a compatible amount in addition to the components evaluated previously, we
of time in autonomous mode. Our system also travels a stress the human-in-the-loop aspect of our system. In
similar distance, indicating that the prior map provided particular, the operator is constantly receiving updates
by the UAV offers efficient paths. Without a prior map, and retasking the robot.
the UGV is unable to find the goal. We find that the We report the total distance traveled, mission dura-
UGV increasingly struggles with long-scale exploration, tion,humaninteractions,APIcalls,prioredgesremoved,
as indicated in Fig. 13. and percent of the time the UGV was in autonomous
mode. As the system experiments feature human in the
loop tasking, we report the number of user interactions.
VI. System Demonstration
We also report the number of API calls, the number of
Through the previous sections, we demonstrated the
edges removed by the planner, and percent of time the
use of the system in relatively controlled settings. In
UGV was in autonomous mode. All results are reported
this section, we show qualitative demonstrations of the
in Table 7.
system in underspecified missions that require reasoning
and the sub-tasks have to be inferred by the system. System Demonstration 1: Mapping and Inspec-
As mentioned in Sec. IV.A, a smaller model is used to tion The first mission was specified by the query “I
generate the object masks to keep the compute feasible. heardofconstructionaroundtheeasternroads.Canyou
Wedemonstratethefullsystemthroughtwoexperiments check?.” The planner inferred that the following classes
in the Pennovation environment shown in Fig. 16. The were relevant: crane, bulldozer, cement mixer, construc-
missionconceptfollowsfromtheonedescribedinFig.1. tion sign, scaffolding, excavator, hard hat, construction
Large-scale demonstrations stress the autonomy stack worker,truck,andbarrier.TheUAVincrementallybuilt
asemanticgraphandprovidedittotheUGV.Through-
out the mission, the UGV reported relevant findings to
Spec. Outcomes Dist.(m) APICalls Failuremodes the human operator, who would then retask the UGV
based on those findings. Overall, the UGV traveled 756
S1 1/3 1200 2 Odom.,Comm.
meters and received 21 updates from the operator. The
S2 2/2 231 4 N/A
UGV spent nearly 90% of its time in autonomous mode.
S3 4/4 265 2 N/A
The manual takeovers came primarily from dynamic
S4 1/1 132 2 N/A
obstacles,suchasbusesortrucks,orsmallobstaclesthat
S5 1/1 450 3 N/A
the UGV obstacle detection could not identify, such as
TABLE5. UGVautonomyoutcomes.SPINEcompletedallmissionsexcept
puddles or potholes. The ratio of API calls to user inter-
fortwoduringthefirstspecification,whichfailedduetoodometrydriftand
actions is lower than in the UGV-only experiments (See
communicationloss.
Table 5). This is because, in the UGV-only experiments,
Cladera*,Ravichandran*,Hughes*etal.:Air-GroundCollaborationforLanguage-SpecifiedMissionsinUnknownEnvironments
the ground robot inferred all decisions autonomously,
whereas in this experiment the UGV would reach back
to the human operator. Throughout the mission, the
UGV provides this information via detected objects and
scene captions associated with the graph. Importantly,
the UGV also provides negative information (e.g., “this
is a parking lot with no construction activity”).
System Demonstration 2: Triaging The second mis-
sion was specified by the query “you are working with
a high-altitude UAV to search for people.” During mis-
sion execution, the user provided additional details. For
example, the user first instructed the UGV to look 30
south and 50 meters east, in order to complement the
UAV’s flight path. SPINE infers the relevant classes are
person, tree, car, bicycle, bench, backpack, streetlight,
trash can, and umbrella. Following a similar mission
concept, the UAV is provided with the same list of
classes to generate and provide a semantic map. SPINE
alsoprovidesaninterpretableexplanationforthechosen
classes: For instance, ‘Bench’, ‘backpack’, and ‘trash
can’ indicate places where people might be found or
have left their belongings. ‘Buildings’ and ‘streetlights’
provide “structural context to the environment”. The
UGV works with the user to explore the environment.
Throughout the mission, the UGV provides natural
language description of the previously unexplored area,
whichprovidessituationalawarenesstotheuserandaids
in planning. Snapshots of the experiment are shown in
Fig.16.Overall,theUGVcorrectlyidentifiedfivepeople.
The detection system made one false positive, and one
person was in the UGVs field of view, but the tracker
failed to register that person.
100
80
60
40
20
0
20 40 60 80 100
Goal distance (m)
)%(
sseccuS
noissiM
ylno-VGU
600
400
200
0
0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500
Time (s)
FIGURE13. UGV-onlymissionsuccessasgoaldistanceincreases.Without
priors,theUGVmustbuildamapentirelyfromexploration,whichit
strugglestodoasthegoaldistanceincreases.
sedoN
fo
rebmuN
Mission 1
Mission 2
FIGURE14. Sizeofgraphasafunctionofthemissiontimefortheground
vehicles.Groundvehiclesreceivegraphupdatesfromonboardmappingand
theaerialvehicle,thusthemapgrowssubstantiallyoverthemission.
FIGURE15. Exampleofodometryfailure.Agustofleavesblewaroundthe
groundvehiclesLiDAR.Thespuriousreturnscausedunrecoverable
odometrydrift.
VII. DISCUSSION, CONCLUSION, AND FUTURE WORK
We conclude the paper by discussing our results, sum-
marizing our key contributions, and outlining promising
directions for future work.
A. Discussion
UGV traversability estimation was a primary system
bottleneck. The UGV struggled to identify negative
and small positive obstacles, limiting the area that the
UGV could safely explore. For example, Fig. 17 shows
a portion from the second system demonstration where
the UGV failed to identify a curb. While the semantic
graph from the UAV provided valuable traversability
information,itcontainedfalsepositivessuchasbuildings
marked as roads. The UGV often identified these errors
online and corrected its path. However, the safety oper-
ator had to take over when false positives brought the
UGV through curbs or other challenging obstacles. This
isparticularlyapparentinSec.VIwherethespecificityof
the task islowerand asmaller model isused togenerate
the object masks leading to harder trajectories for the
Update: I found several vehicles and
streetlights, indicating human activity. I found a parking lot with buses…No
However, no people were directly observed people were found.
Update: I detected a person Scene description: Parking lot Update: I detected a person
FIGURE16. Snapshotsofthesecondsystemdemonstration.TheairgroundteamistaskedwithfindingpeopleinthePennovationenvironment.Theground
vehicleprovidesupdatesinnaturallanguageaboutmissionfindings(people)andbroadercontext(scenedescription,etc).Becausetheenvironmentis
unknownatruntime,suchcontextprovidesvaluablesituationalawarenesstotheuser.
Specification UGVDistance(m) Time(s) UserInteractions APIcalls RemovedEdges (%)Autonomous
(S6)Iheardofconstruction 765 2097 21 41 8 90
around the eastern roads.
Canyoucheck?
(S7) You are working with 695 2390 19 37 15 93
a high-altitude UAV to
searchforpeople.
TABLE7.Systemdemonstrationresultsovertwodifferentspecifications.BothmissionsrequiretheairgroundsystemtoacquireinformationinthePennovation
environment,thustheresultingmetricsaresimilar.
UGV to follow leading to less time spent in autonomous aerial vehicle intermittently provides a map update to
mode. The system used GNSS to register maps between the ground vehicle via an opportunistic communication
robots, but the UGV used LiDAR odometry only for network. We evaluate our system over seven different
state estimation. While LiDAR odometry is typically specifications in urban and rural environments in up to
a robust state estimation solution, it suffers from drift kilometer-scale navigation missions.
in highly dynamic scenes, as shown in Fig. 15. Finally,
we observed that the LLM-enabled planner was unable
perform robust exploration, as evidenced by our UGV-
only exploration experiments (see Fig 13), which made
the UGV dependent on a strong prior from the UAV. Obstacles
Ground
B. Conclusion
In summary, we present an air-ground teaming system
fornatural-languagemissionsinunknownenvironments.
The system infers relevant semantics given a specifi-
cation. An aerial vehicle then incrementally builds a
mission-relevant semantic map, which is relayed to a
ground vehicle. The ground vehicle then uses an LLM-
enabledplannertoinferandrealizesubtasksthatrealize
the mission, and the planner leverages online semantic UGV View
mapping to augment and correct the semantic map
FIGURE17. Examplereasonformanualtakeover.Curbs(circled)arenot
received from the aerial vehicle. During the mission, the detectedbytraversabilityestimation,thusUGVtriestodriveoverthem.
Cladera*,Ravichandran*,Hughes*etal.:Air-GroundCollaborationforLanguage-SpecifiedMissionsinUnknownEnvironments
culty traversing potholes, speed bumps, or curbs, which
maybeincludedinaroadsegmentation.Incorporatinga
robot-based traversability would be a valuable addition
to this work. For instance, in addition to the pre-defined
road label, we can task the aerial robot to find semantic
classes that align with the robot’s experience or claimed
capability to paths better suited to the robot.
Finally, in future work we plan to use dense depth
images to find smaller objects like tree roots or potholes
that robots can avoid based on their capabilities. In
this framework, we can also imagine re-tasking of UAVs
to regions in the environment that are semantically
meaningful. Our pipeline is able to accommodate the
geometric clustering of semantically meaningful objects
into regions. This in turn could be used to interactively
ask the aerial robot to survey desired locations in the
environment with tasks such as “Map all the cars in
parklot_01".
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge Katie Mao, Frank Gonza-
lez, Dexter Ong, and Kashish Garg for their help during
FIGURE18. Examplemisclassificationsmadebyopen-vocabularyobject the field experiments for this work. We would like to
detection.Dependingonthemissionspecification,misclassificationscanbe acknowledge Dr. Michael Novitzky and Tyler Errico for
benign(falselydetectedstreetsign,top)ordetrimentaltothemission
theirhelpandsupportduringfieldexperimentsatUSMA
(falselydetectedperson,bottom).
West Point.
C. Future Work & Open Challenges REFERENCES
Weseeseveralinterestingdirectionsforfuturework.This [1] D. Lattanzi and G. Miller, “Review of robotic infrastruc-
workusesLLMstotranslateandactuponinstructionsin ture inspection systems,” Journal of Infrastructure Systems,
vol.23,no.3,p.04017004,2017.
natural language and leverages a structured map format
[2] T. H. Chung, V. Orekhov, and A. Maio, “Into the robotic
for in-context updates. While this empirically works, we
depths: analysis and insights from the darpa subterranean
lose information in the construction of the maps and are challenge,” Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Au-
explicitly reliant on an uplink to communicate with the tonomousSystems,vol.6,no.1,pp.477–502,2023.
[3] G.-J.M.Kruijff,F.Pirri,M.Gianni,P.Papadakis,M.Pizzoli,
language model API.
A.Sinha,V.Tretyakov,T.Linder,E.Pianese,S.Corraoetal.,
Onboard Language Models. In this work, we use “Rescue robots at earthquake-hit mirandola, Italy: A field
the OpenAI GPT 4o model, which makes us reliant report,” in 2012 IEEE international symposium on safety,
security, and rescue robotics (SSRR). IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–
on a robust communication infrastructure. In our ideal
8.
system, we would be able to decompose the main task [4] H.G.NguyenandJ.P.Bott,“Roboticsforlawenforcement:
from the user into subtasks that onboard LLMs can Applicationsbeyondexplosiveordnancedisposal,”inEnabling
Technologies for Law Enforcement and Security, vol. 4232.
handle. Keeping the interface between the robots to be
SPIE,2001,pp.433–454.
naturallanguageallowsustomaintainthesparsityofthe [5] S. Fountas, N. Mylonas, I. Malounas, E. Rodias, C. Hell-
communication between the robots and interpretable by mannSantos,andE.Pekkeriet,“Agriculturalroboticsforfield
operations,”Sensors,vol.20,no.9,p.2672,2020.
humans in the loop.
[6] C. Liu, J. Zhao, and N. Sun, “A review of collaborative air-
Traversability Estimation. While segmenting aerial ground robots research,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic
images appears to have good zero-shot performance, Systems,vol.106,no.3,p.60,2022.
imperfections in the detections can lead to catastrophic [7] L. Chaimowicz, B. Grocholsky, J. F. Keller, V. Kumar, and
C. J. Taylor, “Experiments in multirobot air-ground coordi-
failureinaUGVwithanaivelocalplanner.Failurecases
nation,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
such as minor localization errors, inability to perceive Automation,2004.Proceedings.ICRA’04.2004,vol.4. IEEE,
thinobjectslikefences,andthechangeindepthbetween 2004,pp.4053–4058.
[8] I.D.Miller,F.Cladera,T.Smith,C.J.Taylor,andV.Kumar,
roads and curbs may result in collision for a naive
“Stronger together: Air-ground robotic collaboration using
UGV planner. Additionally, while a coarse traversability semantics,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7,
estimationcanbecomputedbysegmentingroads,paths, no.4,pp.9643–9650,2022.
[9] ——, “Air-ground collaboration with SPOMP: Semantic
and grass, these are not always meaningful for all robot
panoramiconlinemappingandplanning,”IEEETransactions
modalities. For example, smaller robots will have diffi- onFieldRobotics,vol.1,pp.93–112,2024.
[10] F. Cladera, Z. Ravichandran, I. D. Miller, M. A. Hsieh, [Online]. Available: https://arashasgharivaskasi-bc.github.io/
C.Taylor,andV.Kumar,“Enablinglarge-scaleheterogeneous SSMI_webpage/
collaboration with opportunistic communications,” in 2024 [24] Y.Tao,X.Liu,I.Spasojevic,S.Agarwal,andV.Kumar,“3d
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation activemetric-semanticslam,”IEEERoboticsandAutomation
(ICRA). IEEE,2024,pp.2610–2616. Letters,vol.9,no.3,pp.2989–2996,2024.
[11] A. Agha, K. Otsu, B. Morrell, D. D. Fan, R. Thakker, [25] M. S. Kurtz, S. Prentice, Y. Veys, L. Quang, C. Nieto-
A.Santamaria-Navarro,S.-K.Kim,A.Bouman,X.Lei,J.Ed- Granda, M. Novitzky, E. Stump, and N. Roy, “Real-world
lundetal.,“Nebula:Questforroboticautonomyinchallenging deployment of a hierarchical uncertainty-aware collaborative
environments; team costar at the darpa subterranean chal- multiagent planning system,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
lenge,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2103.11470,2021. https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.17438
[12] M. Tranzatto, T. Miki, M. Dharmadhikari, L. Bernreiter, [26] N. Hughes, Y. Chang, S. Hu, R. Talak, R. Abdulhai,
M.Kulkarni,F.Mascarich,O.Andersson,S.Khattak,M.Hut- J. Strader, and L. Carlone, “Foundations of spatial
ter, R. Siegwart et al., “Cerberus in the darpa subterranean perception for robotics: Hierarchical representations and
challenge,”ScienceRobotics,vol.7,no.66,p.eabp9742,2022. real-time systems,” The International Journal of Robotics
[13] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, Y. Chebotar, O. Cortes, Research, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1177/
B. David, C. Finn, C. Fu, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman, 02783649241229725
A.Herzog,D.Ho,J.Hsu,J.Ibarz,B.Ichter,A.Irpan,E.Jang, [27] J. Strader, N. Hughes, W. Chen, A. Speranzon, and L. Car-
R. J. Ruano, K. Jeffrey, S. Jesmonth, N. Joshi, R. Julian, lone, “Indoor and outdoor 3d scene graph generation via
D. Kalashnikov, Y. Kuang, K.-H. Lee, S. Levine, Y. Lu, language-enabledspatialontologies,”IEEERoboticsandAu-
L.Luu,C.Parada,P.Pastor,J.Quiambao,K.Rao,J.Retting- tomationLetters,vol.9,no.6,pp.4886–4893,2024.
house,D.Reyes,P.Sermanet,N.Sievers,C.Tan,A.Toshev, [28] S.Garg,K.Rana,M.Hosseinzadeh,L.Mares,N.Suenderhauf,
V. Vanhoucke, F. Xia, T. Xiao, P. Xu, S. Xu, M. Yan, and F.Dayoub,andI.Reid,“Robohop:Segment-basedtopological
A. Zeng, “Do as i can and not as i say: Grounding language maprepresentationforopen-worldvisualnavigation,”arXiv,
in robotic affordances,” in arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2023.
2022. [29] H.-T. L. Chiang, Z. Xu, Z. Fu, M. G. Jacob, T. Zhang,
[14] A.Werby,C.Huang,M.Büchner,A.Valada,andW.Burgard, T.-W. E. Lee, W. Yu, C. Schenck, D. Rendleman, D. Shah,
“Hierarchical open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for language- F. Xia, J. Hsu, J. Hoech, P. Florence, S. Kirmani, S. Singh,
grounded robot navigation,” Robotics: Science and Systems, V. Sindhwani, C. Parada, C. Finn, P. Xu, S. Levine, and
2024. J.Tan,“Mobilityvla:Multimodalinstructionnavigationwith
long-context vlms and topological graphs,” 2024. [Online].
[15] J. X. Liu, Z. Yang, I. Idrees, S. Liang, B. Schornstein,
Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07775
S. Tellex, and A. Shah, “Lang2ltl: Translating natural
[30] Q.Gu,A.Kuwajerwala,S.Morin,K.Jatavallabhula,B.Sen,
language commands to temporal robot task specification,”
A. Agarwal, C. Rivera, W. Paul, K. Ellis, R. Chellappa,
in Conference on Robbot Learning (CoRL), 2023. [Online].
C. Gan, C. de Melo, J. Tenenbaum, A. Torralba, F. Shkurti,
Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.11649
and L. Paull, “Conceptgraphs: Open-vocabulary 3d scene
[16] K.Rana,J.Haviland,S.Garg,J.Abou-Chakra,I.Reid,and
graphsforperceptionandplanning,”InternationalConference
N. Suenderhauf, “Sayplan: Grounding large language models
onRoboticsandAutomation,2024.
using3dscenegraphsforscalabletaskplanning,”in7thAn-
[31] D. Maggio, Y. Chang, N. Hughes, M. Trang, D. Griffith,
nualConferenceonRobotLearning,2023.[Online].Available:
C.Dougherty,E.Cristofalo,L.Schmid,andL.Carlone,“Clio:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=wMpOMO0Ss7a
Real-timetask-drivenopen-set3dscenegraphs,”2024.
[17] Z. Ravichandran, V. Murali, M. Tzes, G. J. Pappas, and
[32] Y. Tian, Y. Chang, F. Herrera Arias, C. Nieto-Granda, J. P.
V.Kumar,“Spine:Onlinesemanticplanningformissionswith
How, and L. Carlone, “Kimera-multi: Robust, distributed,
incomplete natural language specifications in unstructured
dense metric-semantic slam for multi-robot systems,” IEEE
environments,” To appear in ICRA 2025, 2024. [Online].
TransactionsonRobotics,vol.38,no.4,pp.2022–2038,2022.
Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.03035
[33] Y. Chang, N. Hughes, A. Ray, and L. Carlone, “Hydra-
[18] F. Cladera, I. D. Miller, Z. Ravichandran, V. Murali,
multi: Collaborative online construction of 3d scene graphs
J.Hughes,M.A.Hsieh,C.Taylor,andV.Kumar,“Challenges
with multi-robot teams,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ International
and opportunities for large-scale exploration with air-ground
ConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,
teams using semantics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07169,
2023,pp.10995–11002.
2024.
[34] D. Honerkamp, M. Büchner, F. Despinoy, T. Welschehold,
[19] A. Elfes, M. Bergerman, J. R. H. Carvalho, E. C. de Paiva, and A. Valada, “Language-grounded dynamic scene graphs
J.Ramaos,andS.S.Bueno,“Air-groundroboticensemblesfor forinteractiveobjectsearchwithmobilemanipulation,”arXiv
cooperative applications: Concepts and preliminary results,” preprintarXiv:2403.08605,2024.
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Field and [35] Z. Hu, F. Lucchetti, C. Schlesinger, Y. Saxena, A. Freeman,
ServiceRobotics,vol.1999,1999. S.Modak,A.Guha,andJ.Biswas,“Deployingandevaluating
[20] A. T. Stentz, A. Kelly, P. Rander, H. Herman, O. Amidi, llms to program service mobile robots,” IEEE Robotics and
R. Mandelbaum, G. Salgian, and J. Pedersen, “Real-time, AutomationLetters,2024.
multi-perspective perception for unmanned ground vehicles,” [36] S.Sharan,F.Pittaluga,V.KumarBG,andM.Chandraker,
in Proceedings of Unmanned Systems Symposium (AUVSI “Llm-assist: Enhancing closed-loop planning with language-
’03),July2003. basedreasoning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2401.00125,2023.
[21] M.A.Hsieh,A.Cowley,J.F.Keller,L.Chaimowicz,B.Gro- [37] Q.Xie,T.Zhang,K.Xu,M.Johnson-Roberson,andY.Bisk,
cholsky,V.Kumar,C.J.Taylor,Y.Endo,R.C.Arkin,B.Jung “Reasoningabouttheunseenforefficientoutdoorobjectnav-
et al., “Adaptive teams of autonomous aerial and ground igation,”2023.
robots for situational awareness,” Journal of Field Robotics, [38] D. Shah, M. R. Equi, B. Osiński, F. Xia, B. Ichter, and
vol.24,no.11-12,pp.991–1014,2007. S.Levine,“Navigationwithlargelanguagemodels:Semantic
[22] N. Michael, S. Shen, K. Mohta, V. Kumar, K. Nagatani, guesswork as a heuristic for planning,” in Proceedings of
Y. Okada, S. Kiribayashi, K. Otake, K. Yoshida, K. Ohno The 7th Conference on Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings
et al., “Collaborative mapping of an earthquake damaged of Machine Learning Research, J. Tan, M. Toussaint, and
building via ground and aerial robots,” in Field and service K. Darvish, Eds., vol. 229. PMLR, 06–09 Nov 2023,
robotics:resultsofthe8thinternationalconference. Springer, pp. 2683–2699. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.
2014,pp.33–47. press/v229/shah23c.html
[23] A. Asgharivaskasi and N. Atanasov, “Semantic octree [39] D. Shah, B. Osiński, b. ichter, and S. Levine, “Lm-nav:
mapping and shannon mutual information computation for Roboticnavigationwithlargepre-trainedmodelsoflanguage,
robot exploration,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2023. vision, and action,” in Proceedings of The 6th Conference
Cladera*,Ravichandran*,Hughes*etal.:Air-GroundCollaborationforLanguage-SpecifiedMissionsinUnknownEnvironments
on Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning [57] J. Wang, G. He, and Y. Kantaros, “Safe task planning for
Research, K. Liu, D. Kulic, and J. Ichnowski, Eds., vol. 205. language-instructedmulti-robotsystemsusingconformalpre-
PMLR, 14–18 Dec 2023, pp. 492–504. [Online]. Available: diction,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2402.15368,2024.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v205/shah23b.html [58] K. Liu, Z. Tang, D. Wang, Z. Wang, B. Zhao, and
[40] C. Huang, O. Mees, A. Zeng, and W. Burgard, “Visual lan- X. Li, “Coherent: Collaboration of heterogeneous multi-
guagemapsforrobotnavigation,”in2023IEEEInternational robot system with large language models,” arXiv preprint
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2023, pp. arXiv:2409.15146,2024.
10608–10615. [59] B.Quartey,E.Rosen,S.Tellex,andG.Konidaris,“Verifiably
[41] R. Sinha, A. Elhafsi, C. Agia, M. Foutter, E. Schmerling, followingcomplexrobotinstructionswithfoundationmodels,”
and M. Pavone, “Real-time anomaly detection and reactive arXiv,vol.abs/2402.11498,2024.
planning with large language models,” in Robotics: Science [60] B. Chen, F. Xia, B. Ichter, K. Rao, K. Gopalakrishnan,
andSystems,2024. M. S. Ryoo, A. Stone, and D. Kappler, “Open-vocabulary
[42] A.Tagliabue,K.Kondo,T.Zhao,M.Peterson,C.T.Tewari, queryable scene representations for real world planning,” in
and J. P. How, “Real: Resilience and adaptation using large 2023IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutoma-
languagemodelsonautonomousaerialrobots,”Conferenceon tion(ICRA). IEEE,2023,pp.11509–11522.
RobotLearning(CoRL),2023. [61] M. A. Hsieh, A. Cowley, V. Kumar, and C. J. Taylor,
[43] OpenAI et al., “Gpt-4 technical report,” 2024. [Online]. “Maintainingnetworkconnectivityandperformanceinrobot
Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774 teams,”Journaloffieldrobotics,vol.25,no.1-2,pp.111–131,
[44] W. Huang, F. Xia, T. Xiao, H. Chan, J. Liang, P. Florence, 2008.
A. Zeng, J. Tompson, I. Mordatch, Y. Chebotar, P. Ser- [62] E. Stump, N. Michael, V. Kumar, and V. Isler, “Visibility-
manet, N. Brown, T. Jackson, L. Luu, S. Levine, K. Haus- based deployment of robot formations for communication
man, and B. Ichter, “Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning maintenance,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on
through planning with language models,” in arXiv preprint RoboticsandAutomation,2011,pp.4498–4505.
arXiv:2207.05608,2022.
[63] N. Roy and G. Dudek, “Collaborative robot exploration and
[45] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter,
rendezvous: Algorithms, performance bounds and observa-
P. Florence, and A. Zeng, “Code as policies: Language
tions,”AutonomousRobots,vol.11,pp.117–136,2001.
model programs for embodied control,” in arXiv preprint
[64] X.YuandM.A.Hsieh,“Synthesisofatime-varyingcommuni-
arXiv:2209.07753,2022.
cationnetworkbyrobotteamswithinformationpropagation
[46] Y. J. Ma, W. Liang, G. Wang, D.-A. Huang, O. Bastani,
guarantees,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5,
D.Jayaraman,Y.Zhu,L.Fan,andA.Anandkumar,“Eureka:
no.2,pp.1413–1420,2020.
Human-levelrewarddesignviacodinglargelanguagemodels,”
[65] M. Saboia, L. Clark, V. Thangavelu, J. A. Edlund, K. Otsu,
arXivpreprintarXiv:Arxiv-2310.12931,2023.
G. J. Correa, V. S. Varadharajan, A. Santamaria-Navarro,
[47] Y. J. Ma, W. Liang, H. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Zhu, L. Fan,
T. Touma, A. Bouman, H. Melikyan, T. Pailevanian, S.-
O. Bastani, and D. Jayaraman, “Dreureka: Language model
K. Kim, A. Archanian, T. S. Vaquero, G. Beltrame,
guidedsim-to-realtransfer,”inRobotics:ScienceandSystems
N.Napp,G.Pessin,andA.-a.Agha-mohammadi,“ACHORD:
(RSS),2024.
Communication-AwareMulti-RobotCoordinationWithInter-
[48] Z. Dai, A. Asgharivaskasi, T. Duong, S. Lin, M.-E.
mittent Connectivity,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Let-
Tzes, G. Pappas, and N. Atanasov, “Optimal scene graph
ters,vol.7,no.4,pp.10184–10191,2022.
planningwithlargelanguagemodelguidance,”2024.[Online].
[66] M.F.Ginting,K.Otsu,J.A.Edlund,J.L.Gao,andA.akbar
Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.09182
Agha-mohammadi, “CHORD: Distributed Data-Sharing via
[49] J. X. Liu, Z. Yang, I. Idrees, S. Liang, B. Schornstein,
Hybrid ROS 1 and 2 for Multi-Robot Exploration of Large-
S. Tellex, and Shah, “Grounding complex natural language
Scale Complex Environments,” IEEE Robotics and Automa-
commands for temporal tasks in unseen environments,”
tionLetters,vol.6,pp.5064–5071,2021.
in Proceedings of The 7th Conference on Robot Learning,
[67] K. Birman, “The promise, and limitations, of gossip proto-
ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. Tan,
cols,”ACMSIGOPSOperatingSystemsReview,vol.41,no.5,
M. Toussaint, and K. Darvish, Eds., vol. 229. PMLR,
pp.8–13,2007.
06–09 Nov 2023, pp. 1084–1110. [Online]. Available: https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v229/liu23d.html [68] M. Novitzky, R. Semmens, and P. Robinette, “Toward mea-
[50] Y.Chen,R.Gandhi,Y.Zhang,andC.Fan,“Nl2tl:Transform- suresofhuman-robotteamingeffectiveness,”Transactionson
ingnaturallanguagestotemporallogicsusinglargelanguage Human-RobotInteraction,2021.
models,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2305.07766,2023. [69] T.KauppandA.Makarenko,“Measuringhuman-robotteam
[51] Y.Chen,J.Arkin,Y.Zhang,N.Roy,andC.Fan,“Autotamp: effectivenesstodetermineanappropriateautonomylevel,”in
Autoregressive task and motion planning with llms as trans- 2008IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutoma-
latorsandcheckers,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2306.06531,2023. tion,2008,pp.2146–2151.
[52] K. Garg, J. Arkin, S. Zhang, N. Roy, and C. Fan, [70] L. M. Ma, M. Ijtsma, K. M. Feigh, and A. R. Pritchett,
“Large language models to the rescue: Deadlock resolution “Metrics for human-robot team design: A teamwork
in multi-robot systems,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https: perspective on evaluation of human-robot teams,” J. Hum.-
//arxiv.org/abs/2404.06413 Robot Interact., vol. 11, no. 3, Sep. 2022. [Online]. Available:
[53] B. Liu, Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, S. Zhang, J. Biswas, https://doi.org/10.1145/3522581
and P. Stone, “Llm+p: Empowering large language mod- [71] M. Novitzky, P. Robinette, M. R. Benjamin, C. Fitzger-
els with optimal planning proficiency,” arXiv preprint ald, and H. Schmidt, “Aquaticus: Publicly available datasets
arXiv:2304.11477,2023. from a marine human-robot teaming testbed,” in 2019 14th
[54] Y. Chen, J. Arkin, Y. Zhang, N. Roy, and C. Fan, “Scalable ACM/IEEEInternationalConferenceonHuman-RobotInter-
multi-robotcollaborationwithlargelanguagemodels:Central- action(HRI),2019,pp.392–400.
ized or decentralized systems?” in 2024 IEEE International [72] C.ReardonandJ.Fink,“Air-groundrobotteamsurveillance
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, of complex 3d environments,” in 2016 IEEE International
2024,pp.4311–4317. SymposiumonSafety,Security,andRescueRobotics(SSRR),
[55] S. S. Kannan, V. L. Venkatesh, and B.-C. Min, “Smart-llm: 2016,pp.320–327.
Smart multi-agent robot task planning using large language [73] I. D. Miller, F. Cladera, A. Cowley, S. S. Shivakumar, E. S.
models,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2309.10062,2023. Lee, L. Jarin-Lipschitz, A. Bhat, N. Rodrigues, A. Zhou,
[56] Z. Mandi, S. Jain, and S. Song, “Roco: Dialectic multi-robot A.Cohen,A.Kulkarni,J.Laney,C.J.Taylor,andV.Kumar,
collaborationwithlargelanguagemodels,”in2024IEEEIn- “Minetunnelexplorationusingmultiplequadrupedalrobots,”
ternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA), IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.5,no.2,pp.2840–
2024,pp.286–299. 2847,2020.
[74] J. Hughes, D. Kim, S. Henderson, and P. Manjunath, “To- [92] C.Forster,L.Carlone,F.Dellaert,andD.Scaramuzza,“On-
wards collaborative aerial swarming architecture for military manifold preintegration for real-time visual–inertial odome-
applications,”in202323rdInternationalConferenceonCon- try,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,vol.33,no.1,pp.1–21,
trol,AutomationandSystems(ICCAS),2023,pp.1049–1054. 2016.
[75] D. Larkin, M. Novitzky, J. Kim, and C. M. Korpela, “Atak [93] M. Kaess, H. Johannsson, R. Roberts, V. Ila, J. J. Leonard,
integration through ros for autonomous air-ground team,” in andF.Dellaert,“isam2:Incrementalsmoothingandmapping
2021InternationalConferenceonUnmannedAircraftSystems using the bayes tree,” The International Journal of Robotics
(ICUAS),2021,pp.1116–1122. Research,vol.31,no.2,pp.216–235,2012.
[76] D. Kim and P. Y. Oh, “Aerial manipulation using a human-
embodieddroneinterface,”in2022IEEEInternationalCon-
ferenceonAdvancedRoboticsandItsSocialImpacts(ARSO),
2022,pp.1–7.
[77] K. N. Lavanya, D. R. Shree, B. R. Nischitha, T. Asha, and
C.Gururaj,“Gesturecontrolledrobot,”in2017International
ConferenceonElectrical,Electronics,Communication,Com-
puter,andOptimizationTechniques(ICEECCOT),2017,pp.
465–469.
[78] “Breadcrumb Wireless Network Nodes | Rajant
Networks — rajant.com,” https://rajant.com/products/
breadcrumb-wireless-nodes/,[Accessed29-11-2024].
[79] Mapbox, “Mapbox,” 2025, accessed: 2025-04-27. [Online].
Available:https://www.mapbox.com/
[80] S. Liu, Z. Zeng, T. Ren, F. Li, H. Zhang, J. Yang, C. Li,
J.Yang,H.Su,J.Zhuetal.,“Groundingdino:Marryingdino
with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection,”
arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.05499,2023.
[81] F.Cladera,K.Chaney,M.A.Hsieh,C.J.Taylor,andV.Ku-
mar,“Evmapper:Highaltitudeorthomappingwitheventcam-
eras,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2409.18120,2024.
[82] F.Dellaert,“Factorgraphsandgtsam:Ahands-onintroduc-
tion,”GeorgiaInstituteofTechnology,Tech.Rep,vol.2,no.4,
2012.
[83] T. Ren, S. Liu, A. Zeng, J. Lin, K. Li, H. Cao, J. Chen,
X. Huang, Y. Chen, F. Yan, Z. Zeng, H. Zhang, F. Li,
J. Yang, H. Li, Q. Jiang, and L. Zhang, “Grounded sam:
Assemblingopen-worldmodelsfordiversevisualtasks,”2024.
[Online].Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.14159
[84] N. Ravi, V. Gabeur, Y.-T. Hu, R. Hu, C. Ryali, T. Ma,
H. Khedr, R. Rädle, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, E. Mintun,
J. Pan, K. V. Alwala, N. Carion, C.-Y. Wu, R. Girshick,
P. Dollár, and C. Feichtenhofer, “Sam 2: Segment anything
in images and videos,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2408.00714
[85] Z. Chen, G. Fang, X. Ma, and X. Wang, “0.1% data makes
segment anything slim,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05284,
2023.
[86] C. Bai, T. Xiao, Y. Chen, H. Wang, F. Zhang, and X. Gao,
“Faster-lio: Lightweight tightly coupled lidar-inertial odome-
try using parallel sparse incremental voxels,” IEEE Robotics
andAutomationLetters,vol.7,no.2,pp.4861–4868,2022.
[87] N. Steinke, D. Goehring, and R. Rojas, “Groundgrid: Lidar
point cloud ground segmentation and terrain estimation,”
IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.9,no.1,pp.420–
426,2024.
[88] H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, and Y. J. Lee, “Visual instruction
tuning,”inNeurIPS,2023.
[89] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, b. ichter,
F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le, and D. Zhou, “Chain-of-thought
prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave,
K. Cho, and A. Oh, Eds., vol. 35. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2022, pp. 24824–24837. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Paper-Conference.pdf
[90] X.Liu,G.V.Nardari,F.Cladera,Y.Tao,A.Zhou,T.Don-
nelly, C. Qu, S. W. Chen, R. A. F. Romero, C. J. Taylor,
andV.Kumar,“Large-scaleautonomousflightwithreal-time
semanticslamunderdenseforestcanopy,”IEEERoboticsand
AutomationLetters,vol.7,no.2,pp.5512–5519,2022.
[91] L.Meier,D.Honegger,andM.Pollefeys,“Px4:Anode-based
multithreadedopensourceroboticsframeworkfordeeplyem-
beddedplatforms,”in2015IEEEinternationalconferenceon
roboticsandautomation(ICRA). IEEE,2015,pp.6235–6240.
Cladera*,Ravichandran*,Hughes*etal.:Air-GroundCollaborationforLanguage-SpecifiedMissionsinUnknownEnvironments
t>ti found=1
start INIT SEARCH COMM
found = 0
t>te
.AND.t>ts
comm_end=1
EXPL
.OR.t>tc
FIGUREA.3. UAVmissionexecutedduringtheair-groundexperiments.
FIGUREA.1. Falcon4platformconfiguredforhigh-altitudesemantic
Figurefrom[10].
mappingmissions.
FIGUREA.4. Communicationnodesusedforfieldexperiments.Left:FE1
FIGUREA.2. UGVplatformusedforgroundexperiments.
basestationnode.Right:dummy ME4nodeusedforLLMAPIcalls.
APPENDIX
A.1. Platforms
While our methodology can support other platforms, we A.3. UAV Localization
use a custom built quadcopter and a ClearPath Jackal In order to localize objects within images accurately we
forthiswork.Figs.A.1andA.2showstheplatformsused need an extremely accurate pose estimate for when each
during our experiments. Both platforms are suited with image was taken. To this end, we use GTSAM [82] to
compute capabilities to generate the semantic mapper fuse GPS position estimates with IMU readings. For
onboard.Thechoiceofcomputeonboardtheseplatforms our IMU we use a Vectornav V100T which runs its
is the result of several iterations of field experiments ownKalmanFiltertofusemagnetometerwithgyroscope
andaretargetedtowardsthemaximumavailableCPU& and accelerometer readings. This gives us north aligned
GPU compute for the power budgets for the respective orientation data from the IMU at 400 hz. We get 5 hz
platforms. The power budget allowed for the Jackal global position readings from the GPS which we model
is 200W and the UAV is allowed a power budget of asunaryposefactors[82]andusethepreintegratedIMU
100W. The UGV and UAV both have a battery life of measurements [92] to constrain the pose graph. As the
approximately 30 minutes. Both platforms were fitted UAVcan cover several kilometers we usethe iSAM2[93]
with Rajant mesh radios. We also used dummy nodes optimizer to maintain a reasonable latency over large
(Fig. A.4) as communication relays for SPINE, as de- distances. We run the optimizer at each GPS measure-
scribed in Sec. III.C. ment. We ensure that we do not include erroneous GPS
measurements by ensuring that they lie within 2σ of the
A.2. Air router & State machine estimated pose and covariance. We also predict the pose
We relied on air_router [18] to guide the UAV during at100hzbyintegratingtheIMUmeasurementsfromthe
the experiments. This high-level state machine, illus- last optimized pose to the current time. We note that
trated in Fig. A.3, transitions the UAV between an while we use this particular set of sensors in this work,
exploration and a communication mission. It also looks theframeworkcouldbeextendedtoincludeothersensors
for ground robots (based on the last known position or such as barometers (for height) and raw magnetometer
last known goal) to deliver messages if communication readings directly. This allows us to get sub one-tenth of
has not occurred recently. a second pose estimates for each image.
Provide Answer Task:
b a v e n e g s h i w i n e c n r l i ( e n I g c f o o o n f u n n e t d c h t e t e h d d e r t i b o v l e a t w c h a k e y ) ve t T h h i h e c e i l d n e re r s a i p v i t s e e t c w a h t e a b i y t l e . . a n G c d k o o f 2
SPINE
Perception Update Active sensing
u T p h d e a t v e e _ h n i o c d l e e _ a i t s t r b i l b a u c t k e ) s( i i n s s p t e h c e v t e ( c h v o i e l c h o l i r e c ? l o ) e f , t w h h i a s t
3
Perception
Inspection 1
query Start
Answer VLM
Image of
object
<- 20 meters ->
FIGUREA.5. ExampleofSPINEusingactiveperceptiontocorrectmission
misspecification.Usertasksgroundvehiclewithinspectingablackvehicleat
theendofthedriveway(1).However,thereisnogroundvehicleattheend
ofthedriveway(2).Thegroundvehicleidentifiesseveralcarsandtrucksat
thestartofdriveway,andinspectsthose.Thegroundvehicleformsa
mission-relevantperceptionquery“isthisvehicleblack”inordertoresolve
themission.
FIGUREA.6. UGVtrajectoryfromthefirstsystemdemonstration.Using
theUAV-generatedgraph,theUAVtravelsover700meterswhilefinding
objectsanddescribingregionsoftheenviroment.
A.4. Active Perception
SPINE uses active perception to resolve errors in the
missionspecification.Fig.A.5showsamissionwherethe
UGVisprovidedthetask:“Thereisablackvehicleatthe
endofthedriveway.Goinspectit.”TheUGVgoestothe
end of the driveway but does not find a vehicle. During
navigation, it observes the vehicle at the beginning of
the driveway. So, it doubles back to observe those, and
queries perception to find the color of the vehicle.
A.5. Large-scale demonstrations
We plot the UAV path from the first system demon-
stration, as reported in Sec VI, in Fig. A.6. Please note
thatthetrajectoryisoverlayedonaGoogleEarthimage,
so the vehicles displayed were not present in the actual
experiment.
