IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 1
SlideSLAM: Sparse, Lightweight, Decentralized
Metric-Semantic SLAM for Multi-Robot Navigation
Xu Liu*†, Jiuzhou Lei*, Ankit Prabhu*, Yuezhan Tao, Igor Spasojevic,
Pratik Chaudhari, Nikolay Atanasov, Vijay Kumar
Abstract—This paper develops a real-time decentralized
metric-semantic SLAM algorithm that enables a heterogeneous
robot team to collaboratively construct object-based metric-
semanticmaps.Theproposedframeworkintegratesadata-driven
front-end for instance segmentation from either RGBD cameras
orLiDARsandacustomback-endforoptimizingrobottrajecto-
riesandobjectlandmarksinthemap.Toallowmultiplerobotsto
mergetheirinformation,wedesignsemantics-drivenplacerecog-
nitionalgorithmsthatleveragetheinformativenessandviewpoint
Figure 1: Robot platforms used in our experiments. We utilize three
invarianceoftheobject-levelmetric-semanticmapforinter-robot
typesofrobotsforourexperiments:twoaerialplatforms,theFalcon
loop closure detection. A communication module is designed to
250 UAV (left) and the Falcon 4 UAV (middle), and one ground track each robot’s observations and those of other robots when-
platform,theScarabUGV(right).TheLightDetectionandRanging
evercommunicationlinksareavailable.Theframeworksupports
(LiDAR)-equipped robot (Falcon 4) is primarily used for outdoor real-time, decentralized operation onboard the robots and has
operationsduetoitssizeandsuperiorsensingcapabilities.TheRGB
beenintegratedwiththreetypesofaerialandgroundplatforms.
and Depth (RGBD) camera-based robots (Falcon 250 and Scarab)
Wevalidateitseffectivenessthroughexperimentsinbothindoor
are more suitable for cluttered indoor environments due to their
and outdoor environments, as well as benchmarks on public
smallerfootprints.AllthreeplatformshaveGPS-deniedautonomous
datasetsandcomparisonswithexistingmethods.Theframework
navigation capabilities, enabling them to safely explore cluttered
is open-sourced and suitable for both single-agent and multi-
environments using only onboard computation and sensing.
robot real-time metric-semantic SLAM applications. The code is
available at: https://github.com/KumarRobotics/SLIDE SLAM.
Index Terms—Metric-Semantic SLAM; Multi-Robot Systems;
Aerial Systems: Perception and Autonomy; SLAM
level. This requires building and maintaining a semantically
meaningful representation of the environment that encodes
actionable information (e.g., timber volume and health in
I. INTRODUCTION
forests, corrosion in infrastructure, survivors’ locations in nat-
Robotic systems are expected to make an impact in de- uraldisasters).Sucharepresentationhastobestorageefficient
manding applications, such as forest inventory management, for the robots to maintain over large-scale missions, and has
orchard yield estimation, infrastructure inspection and house- to allow efficient optimization for Simultaneous Localization
holdassistance.Thisdemandsinterpretinghumaninstructions and Mapping (SLAM).
giveninsemanticallymeaningfultermsrelatingtoobjectsand While traditional SLAM approaches [1], [2] offer excellent
properties in the robot’s environment. To execute such mis- accuracy in geometric perception, including estimating robot
sionsautonomously,robotsmustunderstandtheirenvironment poses and reconstructing 3D geometric structures (points,
beyond its geometric structure and perceive it at a semantic surfaces, voxels), they are often insufficient to support large-
scale missions, particularly when used with multiple het-
*Equalcontribution.† Correspondingauthor. erogeneous robots for real-time autonomy. The challenges
Manuscript received January 9, 2025; revised May 1, 2025; accepted
include managing the excessive computational load, meeting
September2,2025.ThisarticlewasrecommendedforpublicationbyEditor
Javier Civera upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was the high storage demands of large-scale maps, and handling
supportedbyfundingfromtheIoT4AgEngineeringResearchCenterfunded loop closure and map merging operations. Moreover, they
byNSF(NSFEEC-1941529),NationalRoboticsInitiative3.0:Innovationsin
offer limited generalizability across different robot platforms
Integration of Robotics (NSF 21-559), NIFA grant 2022-67021-36856, NSF
grantCCR-2112665,andtheARLDCISTCRAW911NF-17-2-0181. or sensing modalities and lack semantic map representations
X. Liu is with Microsoft, Redmond, WA 98052, USA (e-mail: required for executing semantically meaningful tasks.
liuxushawn@gmail.com). This work was done while X. Liu was
with the GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA Motivated by this, recent advances in SLAM have pushed
19104,USA. toward constructing metric-semantic maps [13], [11], [10],
J. Lei, A. Prabhu, Y. Tao, I. Spasojevic, P. Chaudhari, and V. Kumar are
[17], [18]. However, they are typically limited to single-
with the GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104,USA(e-mail:{jiuzl, praankit, yztao, igorspas, robot setups. For scalability and efficiency, an ideal system
pratikac, kumar}@upenn.edu). should support deployment across heterogeneous robot teams,
N.AtanasoviswiththeDepartmentofElectricalandComputerEngineer-
enablingeffectivecollaborationwithoutrelyingoncentralized
ing, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA (e-mail:
natanasov@ucsd.edu). communicationorgloballocalizationinfrastructure.Extending
©2025IEEE.Personaluseofthismaterialispermitted.PermissionfromIEEEmustbeobtainedforallotheruses,inanycurrentorfuturemedia,including
reprinting/republishingthismaterialforadvertisingorpromotionalpurposes,creatingnewcollectiveworks,forresaleorredistributiontoserversorlists,or
reuseofanycopyrightedcomponentofthisworkinotherworks.Thisistheauthor’sacceptedversionofanarticleinIEEETransactionsonRobotics(T-RO).
5202
tcO
3
]OR.sc[
7v94271.6042:viXra
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 2
(a)3Dreconstruction (b)metric-semanticmapwithpointcloud
(c)object-levelmaptopview (d)object-levelmapobliqueview
(e)outdoorobjectsclose-upview (f)parkinglotclose-upview
(g)buildingclose-upview (h)indoorobjectsclose-upview
Figure 2: Metric-semantic SLAM results from seven data sequences collected by heterogeneous robots. Trajectories in different colors
correspond to different data sequences. Fig. 2a shows a 3D reconstruction of the Pennovation campus at the University of Pennsylvania.
Outdoorobjects,suchasvehicles,treetrunks,andlightpolesaremappedasshownin2e.Indoorobjects,suchaschairs,tables,andmonitors
are mapped as shown in Fig. 2h. Fig. 2b shows the same metric-semantic map overlayed on top of an accumulated point cloud constructed
by our Falcon 4 UAV. Fig. 2c shows an orthophoto depicting the merged metric-semantic map of three parking lots and two buildings
constructed by seven robots. Fig. 2g and Fig. 2h show a zoomed-in view of one of the lab buildings
single-robotmetric-semanticSLAMtodecentralizedoperation decentralized metric-semantic SLAM system that is open-
acrossmultipleheterogeneousrobotsintroducesseveralunique sourced1 andsuitableforreal-timeautonomousnavigationand
challenges. These include performing efficient place recogni- exploration onboard resource-constrained single-robot as well
tion and map merging among robots, maintaining consistent as heterogeneous multi-robot platforms. We enable this by
and probabilistically sound sensor measurement fusion under mapping the environment using a sparse map representation
intermittentcommunication,andenablingcollaborationamong
heterogeneous platforms.
1Code:https://github.com/KumarRobotics/SLIDE SLAM.Projectwebsite:
To address these challenges, we develop a multi-robot https://xurobotics.github.io/slideslam/.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 3
TableI:Relatedwork.ThistablecomparesSlideSLAMagainststate-of-the-artmethods,focusingonkeyattributesforenablingsemantics-in-
the-loopautonomywithrobotteams.Inthistable,decentralizedmethodssupportoperationwithasynchronousobservationupdatesfromother
robots.Semanticlocalizationmeansthatobjectsareusedforlocalizationbetweenconsecutivekeyposes.Semanticloopclosureindicatesthat
objects are explicitly used for place recognition and loop closures. Optimization over object models involves explicitly modeling objects as
geometric shapes and optimizing them jointly with robot poses over time. Real-time with autonomy means that the metric-semantic SLAM
system operates in real-time on-board the robots and is fully integrated into an autonomous exploration or navigation system.
Decentralized, Semantic Semantic Optimizationover Real-timew/
Year Multi-Robot
Asynchronous Localization LoopClosure ObjectModels Autonomy
SlideSLAM 2024 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
Taoetal.3DActive[3] 2024 ✔ ✔ ✔
Changetal.Hydra-Multi[4] 2023 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
Liuetal.ActiveMetric-Semantic[5] 2023 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
Wuetal.AnObjectSLAM[6] 2023 ✔ ✔ ✔
Tianetal.Kimera-Multi[7] 2022 ✔ ✔
Liuetal.Large-Scale[8] 2021 ✔ ✔ ✔
Shanetal.Orc-VIO[9] 2020 ✔ ✔
Yangetal.CubeSLAM[10] 2019 ✔ ✔
Nicholsonetal.QuadricSLAM[11] 2019 ✔ ✔
Choudharyetal.DistributedMapping[12] 2017 ✔ ✔ ✔
Bowmanetal.Probabilistic[13] 2017 ✔
Salas-Morenoetal.SLAM++[14] 2013 ✔ ✔
Cunninghametal.DDF-SAM[15],[16] 2013 ✔ ✔
that explicitly models objects using simple shapes and can be vironments. The system operates in real time onboard SWaP-
usedfortaskplanningandlong-horizonSLAM.Theproposed constrained robots, while maintaining moderate computation
sparseobject-levelmaprepresentationoffersnumerousadvan- and memory demands.
tages. First, it avoids the high runtime and memory demands Experiments: We conduct extensive real-world experiments
of using raw point clouds or images, which is particularly im- and provide thorough empirical results and analysis that high-
portant for large-scale missions with Size, Weight, and Power light the efficiency, accuracy, and robustness of our system.
(SWaP) constrained robot teams. Second, the lightweight We have also made our framework available to the public.
nature of our representation ensures that robot-to-robot in-
formation sharing is feasible, even with limited communi-
II. RELATEDWORK
cation bandwidth. This, coupled with our semantics-driven
Inthissection,wecategorizetherelatedworksintofourkey
placerecognitionandloopclosurealgorithm,enablesefficient
areas: metric-semantic SLAM, place recognition, multi-robot
detection of inter-robot loop closures. Third, it provides a
SLAM,andsemantics-in-the-loopnavigation.TableIprovides
direct and intuitive representation for robots to accomplish
aquicksummaryofseveralkeyrelatedworks.Therestofthis
high-level semantically meaningful tasks, such as actively
sectionprovidesamorecomprehensiveoverviewoftherelated
exploring to search and reduce uncertainties in objects of
works in each category.
interest. Fourth, unlike traditional approaches based on dense
geometric features that usually have to marginalize variables
frequently, which unavoidably leads to loss of information, A. Metric-semantic SLAM
our representation enables us to keep track of actionable
Unlike traditional SLAM, metric-semantic SLAM con-
information over a much larger scale. Finally, it provides a
structs a map that encodes geometric features and semantic
unified representation across different sensing modalities.
information on objects of interest. Metric-semantic SLAM
We summarize our contributions as follows.
has gained significant success and popularity in the past
Algorithm: We develop a real-time decentralized metric-
decade[19],drivenbytherapiddevelopmentofdeeplearning
semanticSLAMframeworkthatsupportsheterogeneousaerial
techniquesthatextractsemanticinformationfromsensordata.
and ground robots, which includes
A variety of map representations are used in existing metric-
(a) acomputationallyefficientback-endthatusesourobject- semantic SLAM literature. Some use dense semantic maps,
level metric-semantic map representation, and a flexible such as meshes [17], volumetric maps [20], [21], surfels [22],
front-end that supports both LiDAR and RGBD sensors, and 2.5D grid maps [23], [24], [25]. Others use sparse object-
(b) semantics-driven place recognition algorithms that use level maps with prior information of object shapes, such as
sparse object-level maps for map merging, centroids [13], cubes [10], ellipsoids [11], cylinders [26],
(c) a decentralized multi-robot collaboration module that structuredobjectmodelswithpriorshapeconstraints[27],[9],
facilitates information sharing, even under intermittent andmesh-basedobjectmodels[28],[14].Followingtherecent
communication conditions. trendsinneuralimplicitrepresentation,somepriorworks[29],
System integration: We integrate and deploy the proposed [30], [31] have also incorporated it into a map representation
framework on a heterogeneous team of robots, demonstrat- capableofmetric-semanticSLAM,whereobjectsaremodeled
ing its capacity to enable semantics-in-the-loop autonomous implicitlyusinglatentfeaturesfromneuralnetworksandused
navigation and exploration in various indoor and outdoor en- as localization constraints and for object association. While
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 4
Figure 3: System Diagram. Our system takes in data streams from each robot’s onboard sensors, which can be either an RGBD camera
or a LiDAR, and performs instance segmentation to extract semantic object features. Meanwhile, low-level odometry, either Visual-Inertial
Odometry (VIO) or LiDAR-Inertial Odometry (LIO), provides relative-motion estimates between consecutive key poses. Next, the metric-
semantic SLAM algorithm takes in such semantic observations and relative motion estimates, and constructs a factor graph consisting
of both robot pose nodes and object landmark nodes. Meanwhile, our multi-robot communication module (see Fig. 4) opportunistically
leverages connectivity to share lightweight semantic observations among robots in a decentralized way. Based on this shared information,
ourmetric-semanticplacerecognitionalgorithmconstantlychecksforpossibleinter-robotloopclosuresatafixedrate.Oncealoopclosure
is detected, the resulting transformation between each pair of robots is used to transform all observations into each robot’s reference frame.
Theseobservationsarethenaddedtotheirownfactorgraphs,formingamergedmetric-semanticmap.Notethattheentireperception-action
loop runs in a decentralized manner onboard each robot. Besides the obvious differences in control algorithms, the planning modules and
the front-end processing algorithms are also different across each robot platform. This is due to the need to accommodate the differences
in sensing modalities (RGBD and LiDAR), operating environments (indoor, urban, and forest), and traversal modes (ground and aerial).
However, the core metric-semantic SLAM framework remains the same.
dense metric-semantic maps are suitable for obstacle avoid- B. Place recognition
anceandfacilitatemorefine-grainedmodelingofobjects,their
computational and memory demands, especially in SWaP- Place recognition and loop closure address the challenge
constrained platforms, can be significant. Thus, sparse object- of identifying whether a robot revisits a previously mapped
level maps are desirable for real-time downstream tasks such location.Thisenablesodometrydriftcorrectioninsingle-robot
asactiveinformationgathering,objectmanipulationandmulti- systems (intra-robot loop closure) and map merging in multi-
robot collaboration. This is because semantic information is robot systems (inter-robot loop closure). Prevalent approaches
necessaryforrobotstoperceivetheirenvironmentandexecute typically use consistency graphs. These methods operate on
tasks in a semantically meaningful manner. Sparsity helps the assumption that pairwise distances between points or
robots reduce resource demands on computation, storage, and landmarksremainunchangedacrosstwocandidatemaps[32],
communication.ArecentworkinthisspaceisConceptGraphs [33], [34], [35]. The largest set of consistent associations
[18], which builds open-vocabulary, semantically rich 3D is then identified and used to estimate the transformation.
objectmaps.However,ConceptGraphsisnotdesignedforreal- However, this assumption is invalid with the object-level
time, onboard operations on resource-constrained robots. Its map representations, where object detection and localization
detection and 3D object mapping pipelines require extensive errors introduce additional inconsistency. Some geometric-
computational resources. By contrast, our work seeks to de- based place recognition methods, such as [36], design hand-
velopametric-semanticSLAMframeworkthatutilizessparse craftedfeaturesforLiDARpointcloudsthataretranslationand
explicitlymodeledobjectsandsupportsreal-timedecentralized rotationinvarianttomatchthemaccuratelyandestablishrobust
operations within a heterogeneous robot team. place recognition. Other methods like [37] generate similar
globalmatchingfeaturesandperformrelativeposerefinement
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 5
usingdeepneuralnetworks.Whilethesemethodsdemonstrate descent[49].However,semanticinformationisusedprimarily
impressiveplacerecognitionperformance,theymayhavehigh in the map representation rather than for localization and
memory usage when storing a large number of geometric loop closure. Another related work, [50], proposes a dis-
features or require large amounts of data to fine-tune the tributed Pose Graph Optimization (PGO) framework based
neural network for place recognition in novel environments. onadistributedGaussian-Seidelapproach[51]byconsidering
Conversely, semantic maps are much sparser, provide richer onlyoverlappingconstraintsamongrobotsintheoptimization
information and can be abstracted from any sensing modality, and extracting objects as landmarks. Object-level semantic
LiDAR or camera. Some approaches leverage this fact and landmarks,becausetheyareviewpointinvariant,canfacilitate
propose descriptor-based methods based on the spatial rela- collaborationamongheterogeneousrobots.Fewworksexistto
tionshipofsemanticobjects.In[38],arandomwalkdescriptor solvetheproblemofcollaborativeSLAMusingheterogeneous
encodingsemanticlabelsofneighboringnodesisdesignedfor sensors. Among them, [52] fuses local pose graphs from
each semantic node. A semantic histogram-descriptor-based differentSLAMalgorithmsintoaglobalposegraph.However,
method is proposed in [39], which improves the efficiency of it is limited to vision-based sensors, which require sharing
graph matching compared to the random-walk-based method. images associated with each pose for map merging. Our
[6] also leverages random walk descriptors with semantic work proposes a more generic and efficient system towards
informationbutfurtheraddsinformationonobjectparameters, decentralized metric-semantic SLAM that supports real-time
angles, and distance between an object node and its neigh- operationonSWaP-constrainedheterogeneousrobotplatforms
boring nodes to filter out false candidates. In [40], Urquhart with either RGBD or LiDAR sensors.
tessellations are derived based on the positions of semantic
landmarks (tree trunks in forests). Polygon-based descriptors
D. Semantics-in-the-loop navigation and exploration
are then computed to describe the local neighborhood of the
Most autonomous navigation systems rely on geometric
robot, which are then used for place recognition. Hierarchical
maps.Althoughsuchmapsarereliableforobstacleavoidance,
descriptors consisting of appearance-based descriptors like
they lack semantic information that robots can leverage to
Distributed Bag of Words (DBoW2) [41] and higher level
improve their state estimation and planning while navigat-
descriptors encoding information about a node’s neighboring
ing the environment. Object-based landmarks help minimize
objectsorplacesaredesignedin[42],[4].Drawinginspiration
odometry drift, thus benefiting autonomous navigation if ex-
fromsomeofthesepriorworks,wedesigntwocomplementary
ecuted onboard in real-time [8]. Recent work goes beyond
placerecognitionalgorithmsthatleverageourmetric-semantic
improving odometry but uses semantic information for active
map representation from diverse sensing modalities (LiDAR
uncertainty reduction planning [53], [54], [5], and multi-robot
and RGBD Camera) and adopt exhaustive search-based and
collaborative planning [25]. The use of semantic information
descriptor-based strategies, respectively.
in active SLAM is relatively uncommon [55]. Some represen-
tativeworkinthisfieldincludes[56],[57].However,therehas
C. Multi-robot SLAM not yet been a real-time decentralized metric-semantic SLAM
Multi-robot SLAM systems expand upon their single-robot framework that enables a team of heterogeneous robots to
counterpartsbyincorporatingtwocrucialmodules:inter-robot explore GPS-denied environments while reasoning about the
loop closure and multi-agent graph optimization. Numerous semanticinformationandleveragingittofacilitatemulti-robot
studies address the challenge of place recognition, as detailed collaboration. Our work seeks to develop such a framework.
in Section II-B. Representative works in multi-robot SLAM
include [43], [44], which rely on a central base station or III. PROBLEMFORMULATION
agent to merge measurements from multiple robots, and [45],
Given an unknown environment and a team of hetero-
[46],[47],[48],whichoperateinadistributedordecentralized
geneous robots, our objective is to construct a hierarchical
manner. Distributed multi-robot systems involve robots that
metric-semantic map of the environment without relying on
coordinate through message passing, possibly with central
any infrastructure. The robots can communicate with each
nodes, while decentralized systems operate without a central
other opportunistically. Each robot must estimate its pose
decisionpoint,enhancingrobustnessbyallowingeachrobotto
and the state of the environment and use this information to
makeindependentdecisions.Decentralizedmulti-robotSLAM
determine actions for navigation and exploration in real time.
is a promising framework in multi-robot SLAM research.
It enables robots to operate independently and collaborate
A. Preliminaries
opportunistically when communication links are established,
allowingthemtoaccomplishcomplextaskssuchaslarge-scale Consider K robots, indexed from 1 through K. The map
collaborative exploration without relying on infrastructure. of the k-th robot M(k) consists of a set of object landmarks
However, the prior works mentioned above only contain {ℓk,ℓk,...,ℓk }belongingtoasetofpre-definedclasses(i.e.,
1 2 nk
geometric information during mapping. Recent efforts ex- object categories). An object is described by its class and
tend the field to metric-semantic mapping. [7] presents a a state vector, including its position, orientation, and shape
system producing a dense 3D semantic mesh, incorporating information.Forexample,acuboidhasthreeshapeparameters
distributed loop closure detection and distributed robust pose- describing its width, length, and height. A cylinder has one
graph optimization based on Riemannian block coordinate parameter describing its radius (we do not estimate its height
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 6
Figure 4: Multi-robot collaboration module for decentralized metric-semantic SLAM. The robots share lightweight metric-semantic
observationsnecessaryforconstructingthefactorsbetweenobjectlandmarksandrobotposesinthefactorgraph,whichincludethedetected
objects and the odometry relative motion estimate (w.r.t. the previous pose) associated with each key pose in the factor graph. Once the
metric-semantic place recognition module successfully finds a loop closure with another robot, the shared observations from that robot will
be transformed into the current robot’s reference frame and added to the factor graph of the current robot.
as it is unobservable for the majority of measurements due to accuracy with which a robot can estimate specified quantities
limited field of view). Ellipsoid models are simplified to have of interest given all the information it has amassed thus far.
two shape parameters (radius and height) and known identity In our metric-semantic SLAM formulation, the quantities
orientation. Objects of each class are modeled using one of of interest include the robot poses x(k) and the map of the
t
the aforementioned three shapes as specified by the user. For environment M. At each time t, robot k receives odometry
each key pose of robot k, denoted by xk, the associated measurements
t
measurements include object detections from this pose and h(k) =x(k)⊖x(k) +w(k), (3)
the relative motion from the previous key pose. The details of t t t−1 t
the shape models, robot measurements, and the factor graph where ⊖ computes the relative pose between two key poses,
used for optimization are presented in Section IV. and map measurements
m(k) =h(x(k),M)+v(k). (4)
t t t
B. Dec-Metric-Semantic SLAM for multi-robot exploration We assume (w(k)) and (v(k)) are indepen-
t t≤T,k≤K t t≤T,k≤K
dent random variables with zero mean and covariance Λ
In this section, we state the general active decentral- k
and Γ , respectively. Currently, both variables w(k) and v(k)
ized metric-semantic SLAM problem (Dec-Metric-Semantic k t t
SLAM). Let I t (k) be all past observations that robot k has are set to constant values since key poses x( t k) are sampled
accrued by time t, from its own measurements, as well as at a fixed robot travel distance interval. However, in our
from messages it has received from other robots. At time t, implementation,weprovideaninterfacetoallowscalingw t (k)
every robot k executes an exploration or navigation policy: according to travel distance and modify v t (k) accordingly to
account for sensor and object detection noise.
µ(k) :I(k) →A, (1) We let C ∈ {0,1}K×K be the time-varying symmetric
t t t
adjacencymatrixoftheundirectedgraphmodelingtherobot’s
where A is an action set of robot k that can include, for
communication. At every time t, any distinct pair of robots i
example, waypoints to follow or low-level control inputs. We
and j communicate if and only if (C ) = (C ) = 1. We
t i,j t j,i
formulate the exploration problem as:
denote the message that robot i sends to robot j at time t via
(cid:34) K T (cid:35) r (i→j) (t).Wedenotetheneighborsofanyrobotkinthegraph
max E (cid:88)(cid:88) U (x(k),M;I(k)) , (2) at time t via
t t t
(µ( t k))1≤t≤T, k=1t=1 N(k) ={j ∈[K]\{k} : (C ) =1}, (5)
1≤k≤K t t j,k
where[K]:={1,...,K}.Foranydistinctpairofrobots(i,j),
where M represents the (static) map of the environment, and
x(k) the state of robot k at time t. The function U is a we denote their last meeting time up to time t as
t t
(potentially) time-varying utility function that quantifies the L(i,j) =max{s≤t : (C ) =1}, (6)
t s i,j
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 7
noting the symmetry in the superscript, i.e., L(i,j) = L(j,i). likelihood state estimation problem at time t as follows. For
t t
Then, the information state of robot k may be defined recur- every robot j ∈ N(k), we consider the message r (t) =
t j→k
sively as (I(j),Mˆ(j)). First we determine common map observations
t t
I t (k) = (cid:91) I L(k,j) ∪ (cid:91) (cid:16) {h( s k)} ∪ {m( s k)} (cid:17) , (7) m ro a b d o e t l b o y op r - o c b lo o s ts ur k e d a e n t d ec j tio u n p o t n o M t ˆ im (j e ) t an b d y M p ˆ e ( r k fo ). rm T i h n e g o i u n t t p e u r- t
t t t
j∈[K]\{k} s∈[t]
of the loop-closure module yields an estimate of the relative
with initial condition I(k) =∅ for all k ∈[K]. transformation (k)T (j) = ((k)R (j) ,(k)t (j) ) ∈ SE(3) between
0
We develop an approach that uses a set of policies µ (e.g., reference frames of robot j and robot k. In particular, a point
active SLAM, exploration, etc.) that take as input compressed with coordinates (j)p in the reference frame of robot j has
representations of M using a custom data structure, i.e., a set coordinates(k)p=(k)R (j) (j)p+(k)t (j) inthereferenceframe
of object landmarks with corresponding poses, shapes, and ofrobotk.Thistransformationisthenusedtodeterminewhich
class labels, as well as a custom rule for updating the data landmarksinthe mapofrobotj correspondtolandmarksthat
structure both using new measurements from the robot and also exist in the map of robot k. Thereafter, the trajectories
information from its communication with other robots. The of both robot j and k are optimized together with the union
explorationornavigationpolicyofrobotkmaythenbedefined of object models in the map, taking care to associate mea-
via surements of the same landmark taken by two robots with the
µ(k)(I(k)):=µ(k)(Π(I(k))), (8) same variable in the factor graph:
t t t t
where the information projection operator Π is given by xˆ(j),xˆ(k),Mˆ(k) = argmax P(x(j),x(k),M | I(k)).
1:t 1:t t 1:t 1:t t
x(j),x(k),M
Π(I(k))=(xˆ(k),Mˆ(k)). (9) 1:t 1:t (12)
t 1:t t
The above equation provides details on the information pro-
Π extracts an estimate of the previous trajectory of robot k,
jection operator Π.
as well as its estimate of the map via
Our system works on robots with different types of sen-
xˆ(k),Mˆ(k) =argmax P(x(k),M | I(k)), (10) sors, including RGBD cameras and LIDARs, as illustrated
1:t t 1:t t
x(k),M in Fig. 3 and detailed in Section V-A. Our metric-semantic
1:t
SLAM framework handles such heterogeneity by using dif-
where P(x(k),M | I(k)) represents the joint probability
1:t t ferent front-end pipelines. We integrate the proposed metric-
distribution of the robot k’s trajectory from the start up to
semantic SLAM framework with our autonomous exploration
time t, and the map M, which includes object landmarks,
and navigation stack as detailed in Section V-B. In the rest of
conditioned on the information state I t (k) of the robot k. this section, we will provide details on individual modules of
Finally, we use the following form of messages the proposed framework.
r (t)=(I(i),Mˆ(i)). (11)
(i→j) t t
B. Map representation
In principle, robot j can construct Mˆ(i) from I(i). Given
t t
the fact that the compressed representation Mˆ(i) we use is
t Table II: Requirements for map representation. Generic implies
memory efficient, we directly share this information to avoid
that the map must be adaptable to various sensing modalities and
the extra computation brought about by the reconstruction environments. Informative means that the map should contain both
step. The map Mˆ(i) is shared only for checking inter-robot metricandsemanticinformation.Sparseindicatesthatthemapneeds
t
to be memory efficient for storage and sharing.
loopclosuresandestimatingthetransformations.Onceavalid
inter-robotloopclosureisestablished,I(i) isusedtoformthe Heterogeneousrobots Placerecognition Real-timeexplora-
t
updated I(j) as mentioned in Eq. (7). I(j) will then be used andenvironments andloopclosure tionandnavigation
t t Generic ✔ ✔
to update Mˆ( t j). Informative ✔ ✔
Sparse ✔ ✔ ✔
IV. METRIC-SEMANTICSLAM
The metric-semantic SLAM framework needs to satisfy
A. Approach overview
several design attributes. These include (1) support for het-
We next turn to an overview of the approach for computing erogeneous robot teams, where the robots may carry different
theinformationprojectionoperatorΠ,whichisoneofthecore sensors, operate in different environments, and share infor-
contributions of this paper. Unlike traditional geometric-only mation with each other via intermittent communication, (2)
methodssuchaspointcloudregistration,ourmethodleverages support for inter-robot place recognition for map merging,
both geometric and semantic information to find common (3) capability of real-time operation under the constraints of
components of maps estimated by different robots, and then onboardcomputationandmemoryresources,sothattherobot
refines such estimates using both its own measurements and can use the estimated pose and the metric-semantic map to
measurements made by other robots. We illustrate this idea guide its navigation.
with a pair of robots k and j at time t, though the argument As summarized in Table II, to support different kinds of
can be readily generalized to simultaneous interactions of sensors(RGBDcamerasandLiDARs)andobjectsindifferent
a larger number of robots. Robot k solves the maximum environments,werequirethemaprepresentationtobegeneric.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 8
To work with multiple robots and allow the sharing of in- In addition to supporting the aforementioned closed-set
formation with limited communication bandwidth, we require object detection methods that only enable the robot to per-
the map representation to be sparse. To enable efficient and ceive a subset of the semantic information in the world
accurate place recognition and loop closure, we additionally characterized by pre-identified labels, we provide support to
require the map representation to be informative so that the incorporate open-vocabulary object detectors into our system.
robots can distinguish different semantic objects even under Specifically, we utilize the YOLO-World model [63] as our
perceptually aliased conditions. Finally, to enable efficient, open-vocabulary object detector due to its real-time onboard
large-scale, and real-time autonomous exploration, we also performance. The YOLO-World model processes pairs of
require the map to be sparse and informative. The informa- images and a list of text prompts, where we specify a set
tivenessallowstheexplorationplannertobetterunderstandthe ofobjectcategoriesofinterest.Themodelthenoutputsobject
environment,suchastheuncertaintiesinthesemanticobjects, detections corresponding to each query in the text prompts.
and generate informative paths. We apply depth thresholding to these detections, similar to
Therefore, we design a generic, sparse, and informative the approach used for YOLOv8.
metric-semantic map representation. It contains a set of ob- Once the point cloud per detection is extracted, these
jects, each represented by a semantic class and a state vector detected objects are tracked over time using the Hungarian
that describes its model parameters, including position, orien- assignmentalgorithm[64].Trackinginstancesacrosstimeand
tation, and shape information. Such a map representation, as from different viewpoints ensures robust geometry of objects
illustrated in Fig. 2, can be maintained throughout the entire and minimizes false positives by rejecting those tracks that
missionoftherobotwhileenablingtaskssuchaslocalization, only appeared once or very few times, which is necessary
mapping, map sharing, place recognition, map merging, and formetric-semanticmapping.Finally,thealgorithmalsohelps
active exploration over a large scale and in real time. with robustness against moving objects by tracking and ac-
The metric-semantic SLAM problem can be broken down cumulating their point clouds. For example, an accumulated
into two subproblems: (a) determining the discrete semantic instanceofamovingobjectappearselongatedwhencompared
labels and data association of detected objects and (b) opti- to its true size, and such objects can then be filtered out
mizingoverthecontinuousvariablesofrobotposesandobject by simply applying a threshold on their dimensions. This
modelparameters(poseandshape).Inthiswork,weapproach preliminary tracking step is used to more robustly obtain
problem (a) using deep neural networks for detection and object-levelobservations.Inthefactorgraphoptimizationback
assignment algorithms for data association, and problem (b) end, there is a separate object tracking step that associates
by first converting object observations into factors in a factor these object observations with existing object landmarks to
graph and then using an incremental smoothing and mapping construct factors in the factor graph.
algorithm(iSAM2)[58],[59]tooptimizeit.Intherestofthis Oncearobustobjectinstanceisobtained,dependingonthe
section, we provide details on these two steps. type of object, a shape model is fitted to the instance. Objects
such as vehicles use a cuboid model, tree trunks and light
polesuseacylindermodel,andirregularlyshapedobjectsthat
C. Object detection and modeling
cannotbeproperlycategorizedintoeitheracuboidorcylinder
The front-end of our SLAM framework is responsible for use an ellipsoid model. Having determined an appropriate
processing raw data from different sensors and converting it model for the object instance, these models are converted into
intoobject-levelobservations.Theprocessisbrokendowninto factorstobeaddedtothefactorgraphfortheSLAMback-end
three components: 1) object detection or instance segmenta- optimization.
tion; 2) object instance tracking to accumulate observations We highlight that we do not rely on a specific object
from different views; 3) shape model fitting to the instances detector. Our implementation has a modular front-end design,
based on the class labels. enabling the seamless integration of alternative object detec-
For semantic segmentation on point cloud from LiDAR, tors in the future.
we trained RangeNet++ [60] with a small modified backbone.
This modelperforms segmentation onthe rangeimage, which D. Factor graph optimization with object models
is a spherical projection of a point cloud. This operation dras- After acquiring the object detections associated with each
tically decreases the inference time compared to performing poseoftherobot,wenowformulatetheback-endoptimization
inference on a 3D data structure such as a point cloud and problem for the metric-semantic SLAM. When a new object
makes real-time inference onboard SWaP-constrained plat- detection arrives, we first check if we can associate it with
forms possible. We use a custom open-source labeling tool existing object landmarks in the map. Upon the first observa-
to generate training data [61]. tion of the object, we will initialize an object landmark. After
For the RGBD sensor, we use YOLOv8 [62] to perform that,onceweassociatenewobjectmodelswithexistingobject
instance segmentation on RGB images and backproject the landmarks, we use the detection-landmark matches to form
pixels in each object instance’s segmented mask into point factorsbetweenthecurrentposeandthematchedlandmarksin
cloudsusingdepthinformation.Weapplydepth-basedthresh- thefactorgraph.Avalidobjectdetection-landmarkassociation
olding within each object instance’s mask, keeping only the needs to meet two criteria: (1) they have the same semantic
points within a certain range of depth percentile, to avoid label, and (2) their distance and model difference are within
including noisy pixels. a certain threshold.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 9
A critical step to form such factors is to define the con- Since the GTSAM solver [59] already provides range and
straining relationship (i.e., graph edges) between the object bearing measurement models, we directly utilize these for
and robot pose graph vertices. This means we need to define optimizing the centroid positions. For dimension estimation,
the measurement models that convert observations of relative we use the moving average method as follows: dupdated =
e
odometryandobjectmodelsintofactors.Wedenotethematrix (1−α)·d +α·d (z), where α controls the weight given to
e e
form of the robot pose x as Hw, where Rw is the rotational new measurements.
t s s
component and tw is the translational component. In the rest 4) Odometry factors: The robot state at time t is repre-
s
of this section, we will describe this process in detail. sented by x , which contains the SE(3) pose. For each key
t
1) Cuboid factors: First, we define the state vector of the pose x , we compute the relative motion from its preceding
t
cuboidobjectmodelas:ℓg =[r;t;d],wherer=[r x ,r y ,r z ]⊺ key pose using the low-level odometry readings from either
istherotationvector,t=[t x ,t y ,t z ]⊺ isthetranslationvector, VIO or LIO, depending on the sensor that the robot carries.
and d = [d
x
, d
y
, d
z
]⊺ is the size. Specifically,thisiscalculatedas∆x
t
=(xo
t−
do
1
m)−1◦xo
t
dom.Our
We first recover the cuboid’s SE(3) pose based on its state factor graph incorporates this relative motion as an odometry
vectorℓg =[r;t;d],andtransformitfromthereferenceframe factor.Thisapproachmitigatesthecumulativedriftcommonly
i
tothebodyframeusingHs =HsHw .Theerrorfunction associated with low-level odometry systems by not directly
cub w cub
for cuboidal objects is as follows: usingthelow-levelodometryasposepriors.Instead,weutilize
(cid:20) log((Hs (z))−1(HsHw ))∨(cid:21) the odometry estimates to interpolate between consecutive
e = cub w cub , (13)
cub d−d(z) key poses that are proximate in both space and time, where
the precision of the low-level odometry provides reliable
where ∨ is vee operator that maps the SE(3) transformation
measurements.
matrix into 6×1 vector, log is the log map, and (·)(z) are
We use the measurement models defined above to convert
corresponding measurements.
the observations and build a factor graph with nodes for
2) Cylinder factors: First, we define the state vector of the
cylinder object model as: ℓg = [b;n;r], where b = [b , b , both robot poses and object landmarks and factors between
b ]⊺ is the origin of the ax i is ray, n = [n , n , n ]⊺ x is th y e them, as illustrated in Fig. 3. We implemented our custom
z x y z
cuboidandcylinderfactorstobecompatiblewiththeGTSAM
direction of the axis ray, and r is the radius.
factor graph optimization library [59]. In addition, we use
Similarly,thetreatmentofcylinderfactorshasbeenderived
GTSAM’sbuilt-inrelativeSE(3)posemeasurementmodelfor
in [5]. We calculate the expected measurement and actual
measurementofcylinderobjectsfromℓg andℓg(z).Wedefine theodometryfactorandtherange-bearingmeasurementmodel
i i for ellipsoid object landmarks.
the error function for cylindrical objects as:
 (Rsb+ts)−b(z) 
w w E. Place recognition and loop closure
e
cyl
= Rs
w
n−n(z) , (14)
r−r(z) Our system is designed with a modular architecture, en-
abling users to integrate alternative place recognition and
where (·)(z) are corresponding measurements.
loop closure algorithms to meet their unique requirements. In
3) Ellipsoid factors: All objects that are not associated
this paper, we have developed two example algorithms that
with a cylinder or cuboid shape are represented by ellipsoid
leverage our object-level metric-semantic map representation.
landmarks. Note that our ellipsoid model is simplified to have
At a high level, they can be summarized as follows:
only two dimensions (i.e., the cross-section is a circle) and
identity orientation. For each ellipsoid object, the state vector 1) SlideMatch: This approach uses an exhaustive search
is: ℓg = [c,d ]⊺, where c = [c , c , c ]⊺ represents 3D strategy by sampling candidate transformations, applying
i e x y z
position of the centroid, and d = [d ,d ]⊺ represents the them to the first metric-semantic map, and matching
e r h
radius and height. the transformed map against the second map to identify
Given the expected ellipsoid landmark model ℓg =[c,d ]⊺ potential loop closures.
i e
and the actual measurements which consists of range-bearing 2) SlideGraph: This descriptor-based approach begins by
measurementsrg(z),θ(z),ϕ(z)aswellasthedimensionmea- performing data association through the matching of
surements d (z) = [d (z), d (z)]⊺, the measurement error triangle descriptors derived from each metric-semantic
e r h
e is derived as follows: map, using both class labels and position information
ellip
Let [c′,c′,c′] = R⊤(c−t ) denote the landmark trans- of the objects. The initial associations are then refined
x y z t t
(cid:113) usingagraph-theoreticframework[34],whicheffectively
formedintothebodyframe,rg = c′2+c′2+c′2 repre-
exp x y z eliminates outliers.
senttheexpectedrangemeasurement,andθ exp =tan−1 (cid:16) c c ′ ′ y (cid:17) The two example algorithms exhibit different behaviors and
(cid:18) (cid:19) x
and ϕ =tan−1 √ c′ z indicate the expected bearing offer complementary performance across various scenarios.
exp c′2+c′2 Generally, we recommend using SlideGraph as the primary
x y
measurements. The measurement error for centroids of ellip- algorithm, with SlideMatch serving as an alternative option,
soid objects is as follows: as further discussed in detail in Section V-J.
 rg −rg(z)  1) SlideMatch: The SlideMatch algorithm takes a pair of
exp
e
ellip
= θ
exp
−θ(z) . (15) object-level metric-semantic maps from either the same robot
ϕ −ϕ(z) (i.e., historical map and current map for loop closure) or a
exp
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 10
pair of different robots. SlideMatch algorithm checks within as a maximum clique search in a weighted graph, when an
a search region if a valid loop closure is found and outputs initial data association is unavailable, CLIPPER can still op-
the relative transformation between the reference frames of erateunderanall-to-allassociationassumption.However,this
these two maps. Unlike [65], here we also leverage additional quicklybecomestoomemorydemandingandcomputationally
informationsuchassemanticlabelsanddimensionsofobjects expensive as the number of object landmarks increases in the
in the maps. The search region of the algorithm encompasses map.
continuousrangesofXandYpositionsandyawangles,where To address these limitations, we propose a method for
the relative transformation between the two maps may exist. generating initial data associations using descriptor matching.
The search procedure is carried out over the search region Inspired by prior research [40], our descriptor design applies
using a user-defined search resolution for discretization. Delaunay triangulation to two sets of object landmarks de-
Preprocessing: For inter-robot place recognition, we de- rived from metric-semantic maps. Candidate simplices, either
signed a preprocessing step that zero-centers the two object- triangles(2Dlandmarks)ortetrahedrons(3Dlandmarks),from
level maps before performing data association. This step eachsetarecomparedbasedontheirsortedvertex-to-centroid
reduces the search region and computation of the SlideMatch distances. A valid match is found if the distance metrics
algorithm, especially when the two robots start far apart. Fur- between two simplices fall within a predefined threshold.
thermore, it enables the algorithm to automatically calculate From these matched simplices, the corresponding vertices are
the search region by setting the X and Y search ranges to extracted as an initial set of object landmark associations.
encompass the region where the two maps overlap and the The semantic class labels of the object landmarks are used to
yaw search range to (−π,π]. further reject false candidate matches. This initial matching
Anytime implementation: The anytime implementation pro- step significantly reduces the search space for the CLIP-
gressively improves the quality of place recognition until PER framework, which subsequently refines these matches
the user-specified compute budget is exhausted. Quality is by filtering out false associations through its graph-theoretic
measured by the number of inlier matches. This approach optimization. The total number of valid matches resulting
guarantees the algorithm returns the best estimate within from this refinement is treated as the matching score, which
the given computation time budget. A valid loop closure is is then compared against a threshold to determine whether
considered to be found if the matching score of the best a valid loop closure has been detected. This two-stage
estimateexceedsthevalidloopclosureinlierthreshold,which approach ensures robust data association while maintaining
is described in more detail below. This anytime procedure is computational feasibility, even for large landmark sets.
achieved by gradually increasing the search region for data 3) Least square optimization: Finally, a least-squares op-
association until it covers the entire region or the compute timization is applied to obtain the relative transformation
budget is used up. estimates between the reference frames of the two metric-
Dataassociation:Thedataassociationstepinvolvesfinding semantic maps, using the data associations provided by either
the possible set of landmarks that are common in both maps. theSlideMatchorSlideGraphalgorithm.Notethatweonlyuse
Candidate transformation samples are generated from the estimates for X, Y, Z, and yaw. This is because roll and pitch
searchregionbydiscretizingthesearchspaceacrosstheX,Y, aredirectlyobservablefromtheIMU,andtheirestimatesfrom
and yaw dimensions, based on the user-specified resolutions. VIOorLIOdriftnegligiblyovertime.Thisoptimizationaims
Specifically, the algorithm iterates through all possible X and to minimize the Euclidean distance between pairs of matched
Y position and yaw angle samples within the current region landmarks found in the data association step.
calculated by the anytime process. Within each iteration, the
objects in the first map are transformed using the sampled X,
F. Decentralized graph optimization for multi-robot SLAM
Y,andyaw,andmatchedagainsttheobjectsinthesecondmap.
The algorithm then evaluates the matching score, which is the As overviewed in Section III-B, for multi-robot scenarios,
total sum of all valid object matches between the two maps. each robot will exchange information with other robots to
Similar to the data association in Section IV-D, a valid object findinter-robotloopclosuresandperformdecentralizedfactor
model match must have the same semantic label, and their graph optimization. When communication is established, the
centroid distance and model difference are within the given robots will share the lightweight observations stored in their
threshold. At the end of each iteration, if the matching score databases, which include object models detected by each key
exceeds the current best matching score, it will be recorded pose and the relative odometry between each pair of key
along with the valid object matches. After all iterations, the poses. Besides, the robots will also share a metric-semantic
best matching score will be compared with the valid loop map containing all object models so that inter-robot loop
closure threshold to determine whether a valid loop closure closure can be effectively performed. Messages received from
has been identified. other robots are saved in the database before an inter-robot
2) SlideGraph: The SlideGraph algorithm, unlike the loop closure is found. Once the transformation between the
exhaustive search-based SlideMatch algorithm, adopts a reference frames of two robots is found, all the previously
descriptor-based matching approach and combines it with a received key poses and object detections from other robots
robust outlier rejection method, CLIPPER [34], for efficient will be transformed into the host robot’s reference frame. In
and robust loop closures. While the CLIPPER framework can this way, we can add both the pose nodes and the nodes for
achieve robust data association by formulating the problem detectedobjectmodelsassociatedwiththemfromotherrobots
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 11
Table III: Robot platform details. Specifications on three types of robot platforms used in our experiments.
Compute PrimarySensor BatteryLife AutonomousNavigationSpeed
Falcon4UAV Inteli7-10710UCPU OusterOS1-64 30mins 3-10m/s
Falcon250UAV Inteli7-10710UCPU IntelRealsenseD435i 7mins 2-5m/s
ScarabUGV Inteli7-8700KCPU IntelRealsenseD455 45mins 0.5m/s
to the host robot’s factor graph in a similar way as described capableofautonomousexplorationandnavigationincluttered,
in Section IV-D. This process is illustrated in Fig. 3. The multi-floor indoor environments. It carries an Intel Realsense
communication and decentralized graph optimization module D435iRGBDcamera,whichistheprimarysensorformetric-
is illustrated in Fig. 4. Although each robot needs to perform semantic SLAM and autonomous exploration. It is equipped
a pose graph optimization using information from all other with a VOXL board, which is used for VIO.
robots,theinducedburdenoncomputationandcommunication The Falcon 4 UAV [8] is equipped with a 3D LiDAR, a
bandwidth is still small due to the sparsity and memory- VectorNav VN-100 IMU, and a Pixhawk 4 flight controller.
efficient representation of object models. Theplatformhasaflighttimeof∼30minuteswithallonboard
One natural question that may arise is why we share such sensors and computer running.
lightweight observations between robots instead of sharing The Scarab UGV [67] platform is a ground wheeled robot
marginalized factor graphs (e.g., as in [15], [16])? We justify carryinganIntelRealsenseD455camera,whichistheprimary
our design choice by the fact that the object-level metric- sensor for metric-semantic SLAM and autonomous explo-
semantic map that we use is significantly sparser than tradi- ration. It is also equipped with a 2D Hokuyo LIDAR for low-
tional geometric representations such as point, line, or planar level odometry and obstacle avoidance.
features. In addition, the number of objects detected at each All modules in our software system, including instance
pose is much smaller compared to geometric features (e.g., segmentation, metric-semantic SLAM, exploration, planning,
corner points). In terms of performance, our representation and control, as shown in Fig. 3, execute in real time onboard
allows us to be memory and computationally efficient, as the robots.
supported by the experimental results in Table VI. In terms
of statistical consistency, our approach does not suffer from B. Deployment for autonomous exploration
spurious information loss due to linearization.
Weintegratethemetric-semanticSLAMalgorithmwithour
autonomous exploration and navigation systems for all three
V. RESULTSANDANALYSIS types of robot platforms. The integration process and the use
A. Robot platform overview of semantic maps differ for different sensing modalities. In
[5], an active metric-semantic SLAM system with similar
Our robot team consists of three types of aerial and ground
map representations is proposed for LiDAR-based UAVs.
robots:theFalcon250UAV,theFalcon4UAV,andtheScarab
In contrast, the RGB-D-based UAV and UGV platforms in
UGV,asillustratedinFig.1.Thespecificationsoftheserobots
[3] face larger odometry drifts. To address this, they use
are provided in Table III.
the outputs of the metric-semantic SLAM framework to not
The Falcon 250 UAV, first introduced in [66] and later
only explore frontiers to gather more information but also
improved in [3], is a lightweight vision-driven aerial platform
to actively establish semantic loop closures so that the state
estimation uncertainty can be reduced. We extend [3] by
(a) upgrading the SLAM module with the metric-semantic
SLAM framework proposed in this work so that multi-robot
collaborationcanbeachieved,(b)deployingtheactivemetric-
semantic SLAM system that was originally designed for
Falcon 250 UAV on a UGV platform (i.e., the Scarab UGV
platform), and (c) supporting a heterogeneous team of aerial
and ground robots to share information and collaboratively
construct metric-semantic maps.
C. Experiment design
Wedesignedandconductedasetofexperimentstoevaluate
ourframeworkanditsmodules.Weconductedfoursetsofex-
periments. Here, we provide an overview of each experiment:
1) Experiment 1: This experiment is designed to evaluate
our decentralized metric-semantic SLAM framework in both
Figure 5: Metric-semantic SLAM results on the KITTI dataset. The
indoor and outdoor environments. We utilize the RGBD-
top, middle, and bottom panels show the results of experiments
equipped Falcon 250 UAV and Scarab UGV, along with
involving one, two, and three robots, respectively. Each cuboid
representsavehiclewhileeachcylinderrepresentseitheratreetrunk the LiDAR-equipped Falcon 4 UAV, each operated by hand-
oralightpole.Theestimatedrobottrajectoriesareshowninorange, carrying, autonomous navigation, and manual piloting, re-
red, and blue for the first, second, and third robots, respectively. spectively. These experiments demonstrate the versatility of
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 12
ourmetric-semanticSLAMsystemacrossheterogeneousplat-
forms and environments. The experimental setup is divided
into two distinct sub-experiments.
(1.a) The Falcon 4 UAV is manually piloted across three
different parking lots, while the Falcon 250 is hand-carried
through four sequential runs inside two buildings. Each of the
seven runs starts with a pre-defined pose. To test the capabili-
tiesofoursemantics-drivenplacerecognitionandloopclosure
algorithms, we create unknown initial poses for each run by
streaming the data from different starting timestamps. During
dataplayback,thesensordatafromeachrobotisprocessedon
a base station with an i7-10750H CPU (comparable to CPUs
onboard the robots), where each robot operates on a sepa-
rate ROS node. We enable communication between the ROS
nodesofdifferentrobotsatpredeterminedintervals,effectively
replicating an intermittent and opportunistic communication
Figure6:Explorationandmetric-semanticSLAMwithheterogeneous
paradigm. This setup allows us to evaluate the robustness and robot teams. This figure shows the trajectories and metric-semantic
efficacy of our decentralized metric-semantic SLAM frame- mapconstructedfromautonomousexplorationexperimentsbyaerial
work across heterogeneous robots and environments. and ground robots. The Falcon 250 UAV explores in 3D (orange
trajectory), while the Scarab UGV explores in 2D (blue trajectory).
(1.b) This sub-experiment begins with the Falcon 4 UAV
Our method can merge maps across UAVs and UGVs by leveraging
and the Scarab UGV inside a building. The Falcon 4, hand-
the viewpoint invariance of semantic landmarks.
carried, maps the entire first floor, while the Scarab au-
tonomously navigates and maps the same area. The initial
poses of the robots are unknown, posing a challenge in place sensor information to facilitate online collaborative SLAM
recognition and map merging. This experiment demonstrates with inter-robot loop closures and map merging.
theeffectivenessofoursemantics-drivenplacerecognitionand 3) Experiment 3: An experiment in forest environments
map merging module in handling data from heterogeneous where the Falcon 4 is manually piloted to different sections
sensing modalities, including LiDARs and RGBD cameras. of a forest for a total of three sequential runs to map all
2) Experiment 2: A multi-robot simultaneous indoor au- the tree trunks. The Falcon 4 platform starts from the same
tonomous exploration experiment where the Falcon 250 and position for each run (for ground truthing purposes) but the
Scarab platforms actively explore the building and jointly data is processed in a manner that mimics a three-robot
construct ametric-semantic map. Allrobots inthe experiment simultaneousoperationwithanunknowninitialtransformation
explore the environment fully autonomously and share infor- betweentherobots.Thiswasachievedbyprocessingthethree
mation through either constantly communicating with each bags of data and streaming them from different timestamps
otherorcommunicatingwiththebasestationattheendofthe such that it replicates the situation of three robots starting at
mission. The robots leverage the metric-semantic map in real various locations with a sufficient translation between them.
timefortheiractiveSLAMsystems,whichtradesoffbetween Forestenvironmentsareasteepcontrasttourbanenvironments
explorationanduncertaintyreduction.Thisexperimentcanbe as they are more cluttered with dense and homogeneous
further broken down into two sub-experiments. object landmarks (i.e. tree trunks). By experimenting in such
(2.a) The Falcon 250 and Scarab platforms start at dif- environments,weshowcaseourlarge-scalemappingefficiency
ferent locations on the first floor of a building. They then and our ability to merge maps from multiple robots in dense
autonomously explore the environment to the best of their and perceptually aliased environments. In addition, obtaining
abilities and build a metric-semantic map. At the end of information on semantic objects in forests, such as tree trunks
the mission, they share their information to the base station and branches, can enhance silviculture practices, quantifying
in an attempt to merge them. The transformation between carbon sequestration, and combating climate change.
the initial starting positions of the two robots is unknown. 4) Experiment 4: In the final experiment, we tested the
This experiment demonstrates the ability of our system to proposedframeworkonthepubliclyavailableSemanticKITTI
operateonaheterogeneousteamofrobotsandbeefficientand dataset. This allowed us to demonstrate the algorithm’s versa-
lightweight enough to leave enough computational headroom tility and effectiveness in scenarios beyond our custom robot
to support their autonomy stack. platforms and experimental setups.
(2.b) Three Scarab platforms are tasked with the operation
of autonomously exploring the first floor of a building. They
D. Indoor-outdoor LiDAR-RGBD metric-semantic SLAM
build a metric-semantic map in a decentralized manner and
without inter-robot loop closures
share information through constant communication using Wi-
Fi in an attempt to construct a merged map. In addition Fig. 6 shows qualitative results on metric-semantic SLAM
to demonstrating efficient operations on resource-constrained for experiment 1.a as described in Section V-C. Outdoor
robots, this experiment also highlights our multi-robot decen- objects such as cars, tree trunks, and light poles and indoor
tralized metric-semantic SLAM module and how it processes objects such as chairs, tables, and monitors are detected and
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 13
Table IV: Inter-robot localization errors. SM and SG refer to the SlideMatch and SlideGraph algorithms, respectively. Position error is
calculated as the L2 norm of the errors in the X, Y, and Z coordinates of the relative transformation between two robots’ reference frames.
In general, the SlideGraph algorithm is more efficient and requires less parameter tuning compared to SlideMatch, while still providing
comparableresults.However,bothalgorithmsencounterdifficultiesinscenarioswhereobjectlandmarksarenoisy,particularlywithRGBD-
based sensing. SlideGraph is relatively more prone to failures in such conditions due to insufficient pairwise consistency in the positions of
object landmarks.
Experiment(Sensor) PositionErr.(SM)[m] YawErr.(SM)[◦] PositionErr.(SG)[m] YawErr.(SG)[◦]
Outdoor-UrbanFalcon4#0toFalcon4#1(LiDAR) 0.235 -0.2 0.074 0.3
Outdoor-UrbanFalcon4#1toFalcon4#2(LiDAR) 0.159 -0.3 0.240 0.9
Outdoor-UrbanFalcon4#0toFalcon4#2(LiDAR) 0.135 -0.9 0.848 0.7
Outdoor-ForestFalcon4#0toFalcon4#2(LiDAR) 0.040 3.1 0.101 0.3
Outdoor-ForestFalcon4#1toFalcon4#2(LiDAR) 0.159 3.2 0.049 -3.0
Outdoor-ForestFalcon4#0toFalcon4#1(LiDAR) 0.054 -0.8 0.126 -2.6
CrossSensingModality(LiDAR-RGBD) 0.542 -4.0 0.578 2.0
IndoorScarab45toScarab40(RGBD) 0.221 -3.4 0.952 -2.3
IndoorScarab40toScarab41(RGBD) 0.165 0.0 0.253 0.1
IndoorScarab45toScarab41(RGBD) 0.460 3.7 1.040 -6.1
IndoorAerial-Ground(RGBD) 0.245 -2.4 – –
Figure 7: Multi-robot metric-semantic SLAM in an outdoor exper-
iment. Results from an experiment involving three Falcon 4 UAV
flights. The trajectories, marked by red, blue, and yellow bold lines,
startfromdifferentpositions(red,blue,andyellowdots)butconverge
back to the same end location (red dot). Our semantics-driven place
recognition algorithm was able to detect inter-robot loop closures,
which are then used to merge the maps. In the map, vehicle models Figure 8: Metric semantic map constructed in real time onboard
are represented by blue cuboids, and models for tree trunks or light three Scarab UGVs. The UGVs autonomously explore the environ-
poles are shown by magenta cylinders. ment while communicating with each other. Blue, orange and red
trajectoriescorrespondtothreetrajectoriesfromthethreeUGVs.Our
semanticplacerecognitionalgorithmwasabletoperforminter-robot
loop closure, which is used to construct a merged metric-semantic
mapped using our sparse metric-semantic map representation.
map. The gray-colored accumulated point cloud is not generated
Object models for vehicles are represented by blue cuboids,
by these UGVs but by a LiDAR robot for visualization purposes.
while tree trunks and light pole landmarks are shown as The figure overlays the trajectories with the metric-semantic map to
pink cylinders. The ellipsoid models of chairs, tables, and qualitatively assess the validity of the results.
monitors are replaced with corresponding Computer-Aided
Design (CAD) models. This is done only for visualization
purposesandanintuitiveinterpretationofthemetric-semantic
results for the forest experiments, with the overhead view
map,especiallyinhighlyclutteredindoorenvironments.These
illustrating that the environment is large-scale, unstructured,
models are colored blue, green, and red, respectively, accord-
and features dense homogeneous objects (i.e. trees). In both
ing to their detected semantic class. This experiment shows
experiments,oursemantics-drivenplacerecognitionalgorithm
the capabilities of our metric-semantic SLAM framework in
reliably detects inter-robot loop closures while accurately
integrating data from multiple robots equipped with either
estimating relative transformations between the robots.
LiDARs or RGBD cameras, enabling the construction of a
Thequantitativeresultsoninter-robotlocalizationareshown
unified metric-semantic map that includes both indoor and
in Table IV. In urban environments, our algorithm utilizes
outdoor areas.
semantic object models of various classes and shapes to
estimatetherelative3Dpositionandyawbetweeneachpairof
E. Urban and forest LiDAR-only metric-semantic SLAM with robots. In forest settings, our method leverages models of tree
inter-robot loop closures trunks for inter-robot localization. The SlideMatch algorithm
Fig. 7 shows qualitative results on multi-robot metric- achieves an average position error of 0.13 m and a yaw
semantic SLAM, demonstrating inter-robot loop closure and error of 0.68◦, with standard deviations of 0.07 m and 1.76◦,
map merging capabilities in outdoor environments using respectively. In contrast, the SlideGraph algorithm shows an
LiDAR-equipped Falcon 4 UAVs. This experiment utilizes average position error of 0.24 m and a yaw error of -0.57◦,
data from experiment 1.a. In this specific setup, the trans- with standard deviations of 0.28 m and 1.60◦, respectively.
formation between the robots is unknown and thus has to Despite significant variations in object classes, appearance,
be estimated to merge their maps. Fig. 10 shows qualitative and density when transitioning from urban to forest environ-
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 14
ments, both algorithms consistently demonstrate robust and
accurate performance. Furthermore, the SlideGraph algorithm
requires less parameter tuning and, unlike SlideMatch which
relies on a computationally expensive exhaustive search, is
more efficient.
F. Indoor RGBD-only aerial-ground metric-semantic SLAM
with inter-robot loop closures Figure 9: Cross sensing modality place recognition. A LiDAR-
equippedrobotisrepresentedbytheorangetrajectoryandanRGBD-
In this experiment, the starting position and orientation of based robot by the blue trajectory. The rest of the panels show
the merged metric-semantic map constructed by the robots and
the robots vary significantly, with up to 6 m in position and a
overlayedontopoftheaccumulatedLiDARpointcloud.Theupper-
90◦ difference in yaw. Fig. 8 shows the results constructed by
right panel illustrates the robots’ trajectories in their own reference
mergingsensormeasurementsfromthreeUGVsautonomously frames.Thiscomparisonshowshowtheplace-recognitionandloop-
exploring the environment. Our semantics-driven place recog- closure algorithm effectively registers the two robots with different
nition algorithm was able to detect and accurately estimate sensingmodalitiesintoacommonreferenceframedespitethedrastic
differences in raw sensor data and the initial poses.
relative transformations as robots accumulate observations.
Based on the estimated relative transformations, our metric-
semantic factor graph fuses the information from multiple
G. Indoor LiDAR-RGBD metric-semantic SLAM with inter-
robots to construct a merged metric-semantic map.
robot loop closures
The quantitative results are shown in Table IV. For the in-
Fig. 9 shows qualitative results on multi-robot metric-
door experiment with multiple Scarab UGVs, our SlideMatch
semantic SLAM on the cross sensing modality experiment
algorithm achieves an average position error of 0.28 m and
(i.e., experiment 1.b in Section V-C). The accumulated point
a yaw error of 0.10°, with standard deviations of 0.13 m
cloud captured by the LiDAR robot is overlaid on the se-
and 2.90°, respectively. Our SlideGraph algorithm achieves
mantic object models mapped by both the LiDAR and the
anaveragepositionerrorof0.75mandayawerrorof-2.77°,
RGBD robots. Note that there is a relative transformation
with standard deviations of 0.35 m and 2.55°, respectively.
of 2.51 m along X, -5.37 m along Y, and 90◦ along yaw
Fig. 6 shows the results constructed by the Falcon 250 and
betweenthereferenceframesofthetworobots.Ouralgorithm
one of the UGVs that autonomously explore the environment.
leverages the invariance of semantic object models across
Theinvarianceofsemanticobjectmodelstoviewpointchanges
sensing modalities. This is a unique advantage of our method
enables our algorithm to merge measurements from different
given that geometric features extracted from RGB or depth
viewpoints as observed by heterogeneous aerial and ground
images significantly differ from those derived from LiDAR
robots. As shown in the last row of Table IV, the SlideMatch
point clouds. This capability enables accurate estimation of
algorithm successfully identifies inter-robot loop closures and
the transformation between robots equipped with different
estimates the relative transformation with a position error of
sensors—specifically LiDAR and RGBD—allowing us to fuse
0.245 m and a yaw error of 2.35◦. However, we observed that
theirmeasurementsandcreateamergedmetric-semanticmap.
aerial-ground localization exhibits slightly larger errors along
Quantitative results are shown in Table IV. Our semantics-
the Z-axis compared to localization errors among identical
driven place recognition algorithms demonstrate the ability to
robot platforms. This discrepancy arises because aerial robots
establishloopclosuresbetweenrobotsequippedwithdifferent
primarily observe the upper parts of objects, while ground
sensors. SlideMatch estimates the relative transformation with
robots focus on the lower parts, leading to greater variation in
a position error of 0.542 m and a yaw error of -4.00◦, while
Z-axis estimates. In contrast, the SlideGraph algorithm fails
SlideGraph results in a position error of 0.578 m and a yaw
to perform inter-robot loop closures between RGBD-based
error of 2.00◦. The accuracy of inter-robot localization in
aerial and ground robots. This limitation is caused by reduced
cross-sensing-modality scenarios is slightly lower compared
pairwise consistency between object positions in the map,
to single-modality experiments, particularly those involving
which stems from noisy RGB-D sensing combined with the
LiDAR-based robots. This performance decline can be at-
fact that the aerial and ground robots observe different parts
tributed to differences in fields of view, object detection
of the objects.
accuracy,andnoiselevelsbetweenLiDARandRGBDsensors.
Insummary,whilenoisyRGBDsensingcanintroduceinac-
Thesefactorsleadtogreaterdiscrepanciesinobjectmodeling,
curaciesinthelocalizationandmodelingofindividualobjects,
which,inturn,reducetheprecisionofinter-robotlocalization.
a collection of object landmarks provides the robots with
an informative description of the environment. This enables
H. Object mapping quantitative results
them to establish loop closures even under drastic viewpoint
changes. In addition, it is important to note that the increased Wereportprecision,recall,andF1scoresonobjectmapping
noise levels require a careful selection of parameters, such results of both cars and tree trunks across multiple exper-
as the search discretization in SlideMatch or the descriptor iments. We first obtain the ground truth by surveying the
matching threshold in SlideGraph. environment and manually marking down the positions of
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 15
relative pose) factor in the factor graph optimization process
[58].Gisasmallnumber,andspecificallyinourformulation,
the variables corresponding to each cuboid, cylinder, and
ellipsoid semantic landmark node are 9, 9, and 5, respec-
tively. Therefore, this complexity becomes O(1) for adding
any new factor. Upon loop closure, the optimization runs in
time O
(cid:0) max(F,S)1.5(cid:1)
[58]. Practically, in traditional SLAM
systems that are based on geometric features, the number of
features usually far exceeds the number of robot poses. As a
result, max(F,S)=S, which is usually at the order of 100F
Figure 10: Forest experiments. This figure illustrates the overhead (i.e.eachkeyframetracks100features)orevenlarger.Dueto
UAV view of the environment (top left), metric-semantic map with
the use of sparse semantic landmarks in the proposed system,
point clouds (top right), and object-based map constructed by three
S will usually be of the order O(F). Therefore, to sum up,
under-canopyUAVflights(bottomrow).Threerobotswiththeirtra-
jectoriescoloredinred,yellow,andbluecanmergetheirinformation the complexity of factor graph optimization is O(1) during
tothestartinglocationwithunknowninitialtransformationsbetween normal operation and O(F1.5) during loop closures.
their starting poses. The figure shows metric-semantic maps of tree When running with multi-robot teams, the framework runs
trunks(modeledascylinders)overlayedontopofanaggregatedpoint
in a decentralized manner; therefore, for each robot, the
cloud showing the forest environment. The trajectory of each robot,
complexity scales linearly with the size of the robot team
in this case, is ∼1 km in length, and 860 trees have been mapped.
The mapped trees span an area of ∼160,000 m2. (thatis,K).Asaresult,thecomplexityofdecentralizedfactor
graph optimization is O(K) when adding new factors coming
from the robot team, and O((K·F)1.5) during loop closures.
objects. Here, we focus the object mapping results on cars In practice, the size of the robot team K is much smaller
and tree trunks since ground truth for them can be reliably than the number of poses for each robot F; therefore, the
acquiredwhencomparedtootherobjectssuchaschairs,tables decentralized factor graph optimization can be executed in
or monitors. This is because cars are usually parked in clearly real-time onboard the robot.
separatedparkingspacesandtreetrunksareoftenspacedapart 2) Experimental results: In this section, we show the
at regular intervals. A True Positive (TP), or a valid object computational and communication usage when running our
match, occurs when an object in our metric-semantic map is metric-semantic SLAM framework. All results are obtained
confirmed to exist at a position that aligns with the ground using a computer equipped with an Intel i7-10750H CPU,
truth. A False Positive (FP) refers to an object that appears without the support of a GPU. This CPU’s performance is
in our metric-semantic map but is not present in the ground comparable to that of the onboard computers in the robots. In
truth. Conversely, a False Negative (FN) refers to an object Table VI, the average and maximum size of communication
that is present in the ground truth but does not appear in our packetsaresummarizedwhenrobotsoperatewithintermittent
metric-semantic map. These values are then used to calculate communication.Toreplicateintermittentcommunication,each
precision, recall, and F1 scores. The results can be found robotpublishesROSmessagestoeachotherevery10seconds.
in Section V-H. Note that those results are acquired using Benefiting from the sparse metric-semantic map representa-
the smallest backbone (darknet-13 as detailed in [5]) for the tion, our algorithm is shown to be communication efficient
semantic segmentation model, which is less accurate but can when deployed on real robots. The similarity in communi-
run inference in real time using the onboard NUC computer. cation usage across different robots stems from the fact that
The results can be further improved using larger backbones we replicate all robots as being within communication range
suchasdarknet-26ordarknet-53,whicharesupportedin[60]. by streaming their data on different ROS nodes running on a
As shown in Section V-H, the average precision for cars is laptop. For indoor experiments, communication is facilitated
0.967 and for tree trunks is 0.946. The average recall for cars viaWi-Fi.Althougheachrobotsharesalltheinformationinits
is 0.881 and for tree trunks is 0.909. The F1 score is 0.922 database with neighboring robots within the communication
for cars and 0.927 for tree trunks. In summary, through these
metrics, we demonstrate that our method is able to reliably
Table V: Quantitative results of object detection: Ground Truth
detectandmapobjectsthatexistintheenvironment,withvery
(G.T.) vs. Estimated (Est.). Precision is evaluated by determining
few false positives or false negatives. This result is important the proportion of detected objects that accurately match the ground
for downstream tasks such as inventory estimation. truth,thusmeasuringthealgorithm’sobjectmappingaccuracy.Recall
indicates the likelihood of the algorithm successfully detecting an
object present in the environment, reflecting the algorithm’s object
I. Communication usage and runtime analysis mapping sensitivity.
1) Discussiononscalability: Forthefactorgraphoptimiza- Envir. G.T.Cars Est.Cars Precision Recall F1
Lot1 42 35 1.00 0.833 0.909
tion, suppose we have G variables for each object landmark
Lot2 61 59 0.932 0.902 0.917
and B total object landmarks. The total number of variables Lot3 32 29 1.00 0.906 0.951
for all landmarks is S = G·B. When adding a new factor, Total 135 123 0.967 0.881 0.922
Envir. G.T.Trees Est.Trees Precision Recall F1
the number of variables that need to be solved for is G for
Total 77 74 0.946 0.909 0.927
a new object factor, and 9 for a new odometry (i.e., SE(3)
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 16
range, we can further reduce the communication burden by (KB) for indoor environments, 1.84 KB for outdoor environ-
implementing a bookmarking system that only publishes new ments, and 2.03 KB for forest environments. The average
information since the last communication between robots. communication bandwidth per meter traveled by the robot
Additionally, the runtime for factor adding and graph op- is 1.65 KB in indoor settings, 1.85 KB in outdoor settings,
timization, and loop closure (if applicable), is reported in and 5.13 KB in forest settings. As the density of landmarks
TableVI.Exceptfortheloopclosuremodule,whichisusedto in the environment increases, communication overhead also
identify inter-robot loop closures and operates on a separate increases. However, the overall communication bandwidth
CPU thread, all other modules are triggered each time new required remains minimal. This modest communication de-
observations arrive. mand is particularly important when robots operate under
The front-end runtime depends on the object segmentation intermittentandbandwidth-limitedcommunicationconditions.
and detection model. Our results show that on a single thread In addition, this efficiency in communication also shows
of Intel i7-10750H CPU, the Rangenet++ [60] front-end with the effectiveness of sparse semantic mapping in minimizing
our custom darknet-13 model runs at 1.5 hertz (Hz). The resource usage.
front-end with the YOLOv8 [62], specifically, YOLOv8m, To sum up, the results show that, although there is some
runs at 1 Hz per CPU thread. When multiple CPU threads varianceacrossdifferentenvironmentsduetothedifferencein
are used, the inference speed can be increased. For example, densityofobjects,theuseofsparsesemanticmaprepresenta-
YOLOv8m can run at 3 Hz using 4 out of 12 CPU threads. tions offers the robot a rich understanding of its surroundings
The cuboid, cylinder, and ellipsoid modeling process runs at while maintaining efficiency in computation, storage, and
the corresponding object detection rate. communication.Ourproposedmethodnotonlyfacilitatesreal-
The back-end factor graph adding and graph optimization time execution of exploration and navigation tasks but also
processes show different patterns across different environ- enables multi-robot collaboration across various environments
ments. For the indoor environment, the average runtime of on a large scale.
graphoptimizationis2∼4ms,with68landmarks.Theoutdoor
urban environment exhibits an average runtime of graph opti- J. Analysis of SlideMatch and SlideGraph algorithms
mization of 10.14 ms, with 249 landmarks. The average time
Throughout these experiments, we have observed unique
per landmark in this setting is 0.041 ms. Due to the increased
advantages, limitations, and deployment considerations for
density of landmarks in the outdoor forest environment, the
both the SlideGraph and SlideMatch algorithms. SlideGraph
averageruntimespikesto36.46ms,withasignificantlyhigher
demonstrates superior performance with minimal parameter
number of landmarks at 860.
tuninginscenarioswheretheobject-levelmetric-semanticmap
These results illustrate that the average runtime required
experiences relatively low noise in object position estimates.
for factor graph adding and graph optimization increases with
Therefore, SlideGraph is generally the preferred option, par-
the number of landmarks. This relationship is influenced by
ticularly for LiDAR-based experiments or scenarios involv-
thepresenceofinter-robotloopclosuresintheseexperiments,
ing large search spaces. On the other hand, the SlideMatch
which makes the computational complexity lie between ob-
algorithm can sometimes achieve successful loop closure in
serving new landmarks and processing loop closures.
situations where the SlideGraph method fails, particularly in
Theruntimealsoincreaseswiththetrajectorylength,which
experiments with large errors in object position estimates.
is partly due to more pose nodes being added to the graph.
This is because the pairwise consistency assumption used
However,thecorrelationbetweentrajectorylengthandruntime
in [34] becomes less suitable under such conditions. Such
is not as strong as the correlation between the number of
situationsarecommoninindoorRGBD-basedobjectmapping,
landmarks and runtime. An increase in the runtime per meter
where cluttered spaces lead to small differences in object-
traveledbytherobotisobservedastheenvironmenttransitions
to-object distances and high noise in position estimates due
from less complex settings (indoor) to more complex ones
to noisy depth measurements, noisy local odometry, limited
(outdoor forest). This trend also shows the challenges and
field of view, and complex object shapes. Although semantic
computational costs associated with large-scale environments.
labels can help disambiguate these measurements to some
Although the runtime of the semantics-driven place recog-
extent, it remains challenging to use pairwise consistency
nition and loop closure algorithms is longer than that of
to distinguish outliers from inliers. In contrast, SlideMatch
factor graph optimization, the resulting latency is acceptable.
leverages the entire map and operates similarly to a voting
In addition, since the semantics-driven place recognition and
method, making it more tolerant to noise in local pairwise
loop closure algorithm operate in a separate CPU thread, this
object distances. As a result, SlideMatch performs better in
latency does not directly impact real-time localization and
such worst-case scenarios, albeit at the cost of significant
navigation. Once the computation is complete, the estimated
computational overhead.
loop closure information can be used by the factor graph to
update both the map and the robot trajectories.
K. Benchmarks
In addition to the importance of sparse semantic landmarks
in facilitating long-range autonomous exploration and naviga- In this section, we present a series of benchmark ex-
tion, ourresults on communicationprovide anotherreason for periments evaluating our system’s performance in terms of
using semantic landmarks in multi-robot collaboration tasks. localization accuracy, computational efficiency, and memory
The average communication per landmark is 3.96 kilobytes usage. We report results from (1) evaluating our framework
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 17
Table VI: Runtime and communication results. The runtime for factor addition and graph optimization accounts for handling both the
observation of new landmarks and loop closure scenarios. The runtime of semantics-driven place recognition and loop-closure algorithms
includes both loop closure detection and relative transformation estimation. Note that the place-recognition and loop-closure process runs
on a separate thread. Therefore, its latency does not impact real-time operation. SlideGraph requires significantly lower computational
runtime, particularly in environments with fewer object landmarks. This efficiency is attributed to the use of descriptor-based matching,
where computational demands are influenced not by the scale of the environment but only by the number of object landmarks. In contrast,
SlideMatchexhaustivelysearchesacrosstheentiresearchregion,anditsruntimedependsonvariousfactors,suchasthesearchdiscretization.
The communication usage is measured by the size of messages published by each robot. Here, the average usage is calculated by dividing
the total size of all messages by the number of messages, while the maximum size corresponds to the size of the last messages since they
usually contain the most observations.
Numberof Trajectory Runtime[ms] CommunicationUsage[MB]
RobotID
Objects Length[m] FactorAddingand Inter-RobotLoopClosure Average Maximal
GraphOptimization SlideGraph/SlideMatch CommunicationUsage CommunicationUsage
0 172.072 2.429 22/3638 0.304 0.578
Indoor 68 1 155.930 4.008 24/1614 0.304 0.575
2 194.625 2.372 28/2252 0.309 0.576
0 699.543 9.351 95/131 0.458 0.725
OutdoorUrban 249 1 264.264 7.763 86/123 0.453 0.727
2 410.194 13.296 91/168 0.466 0.725
0 326.476 28.702 209/1124 1.702 2.686
OutdoorForest 860 1 367.798 28.638 406/2091 1.735 2.687
2 746.870 52.046 375/1836 1.742 2.686
on standard public datasets and (2) comparing it with other robot localization but also illustrate the effectiveness of the
open-source methods. We note that benchmarking the entire proposed algorithm framework when deployed on public
system is challenging due to the differences in components datasets, showing its potential as a plug-and-play tool for
across other metric-semantic SLAM systems. Therefore, we multi-robot metric-semantic SLAM.
opttoisolateandbenchmarkkeymodulesinstead.Thisallows 2) Benchmark against existing loop closure methods:
for a fair and focused comparison of our system. To provide a comprehensive comparison, we benchmark
1) BechmarkonSemanticKITTI: Inadditiontoconducting SlideSLAM against two existing approaches from the liter-
experimentswithourownrobots,wealsotestedouralgorithm ature. These include: (1) LCDNet [37], a deep-learning-based
framework on the publicly available Semantic KITTI dataset. loop closure method for LiDAR data; and (2) CLIPPER [34],
The framework takes in the point clouds, initial pose esti- a graph-theoretic algorithm for data association.
mation from SuMa++ [22], and ground truth segmentation, LCDNet performs scan-to-scan place recognition using a
and estimates the metric-semantic map as well as the robot learned 3D feature extractor and registration network. We
trajectory. benchmark the algorithm using weights that are pretrained on
The qualitative results, as shown in Fig. 5, demonstrate the KITTI dataset. We use the same sequences and splits of
the ability of the proposed framework to construct metric- Semantic KITTI as described in the previous benchmark. We
semanticmapsandmergemeasurementsfrommultiplerobots. also benchmark LCDNet on our forest data, as described in
We conducted a quantitative evaluation of our SlideGraph theprevioussections.ThebenchmarksforLCDNetwerecon-
algorithmforinter-robotloopclosureusingsequences#5and ductedonaGPU-equippeddesktop(withanRTX3070GPU).
#7. Sequence #7 was divided into three intervals, i.e., (0, The inter-robot localization results are shown in Table VII.
600), (400, 1000), and (500, 1100), for the first, second, and The results are comparable in the KITTI environment. How-
third robots, respectively. Sequence #5 was similarly divided ever, for the forest environment, SlideSLAM provides better
into three intervals, i.e., (0, 1000), (700, 2000), and (1600, localizationresults.Thisshowstheadvantageofourmethodto
2760), to create datasets for each of the three robots. Our generalize to different environments as long as the objects are
algorithm successfully identified inter-robot loop closures and detected. Our method requires no additional fine-tuning data
accurately estimated the relative transformations between the for the loop closure step, whereas LCDNet does. Moreover,
robots. For sequence #5, the SlideGraph algorithm results in we also benchmark the memory requirements to store the
a position error of 0.03 m and 0.05 m, and a rotation error observations or maps required for the loop closure step. For
of 0.080◦ and 0.065◦ for the transformations between robot 0 LCDNet, these representations can be individual processed
and robot 1, and between robot 1 and robot 2, respectively. point cloud scans (0.84 MB), point features extracted from
In sequence #7, the algorithm results in a position error of the PV-RCNN network for each point cloud scan (4.18 MB),
0.093 m and 0.095 m, and a rotation error of 0.096◦ and or the final global descriptors of those features for each point
0.097◦. For sequence #5 and sequence #7, the total trajectory cloud scan (10.0 MB). As a result, enabling inter-robot loop
lengths of three robots are 2.8 km and 1.2 km. The absolute closuredetectionwithLCDNetrequiresaminimumbandwidth
trajectoryerrorsofthetrajectoriesofallthreerobotsare0.998 of 0.84 MB per LiDAR scan. In contrast, as shown in the
m (vs. 1.154 m from SuMa++) and 0.962 m (vs. 1.148 m table, the entire object map of SlideSLAM requires less than
fromSuMa++),respectively.Therelativetranslationerrorsare 10 KB for the KITTI sequences, which contain hundreds of
0.111% and 0.255%. The relative rotation errors are 0.0011 LiDAR scans. The sparsity of our map representation offers
degrees/m and 0.00256 degrees/m. a key advantage for large-scale multi-robot experiments, as it
These results not only demonstrate the accuracy of inter- significantly reduces both computational and communication
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 18
TableVII:BenchmarkcomparisonbetweenSlideSLAM(SlideGraph)andexistingmethods.Forthesebenchmarks,wereportresultsbetween
robot0androbot1,asreferencedbytheSemanticKITTIexperimentsinSectionV-K1andforestexperimentsinSectionV-E.Notethatthe
mapsizesforbothCLIPPERandSlideSLAMarethesame,astheyusethesameobjectmapsasinputs.Also,notethatforthememoryand
runtimebenchmarksofLCDNet,theresultsreportedarethememoryconsumedforeachindividualpointcloudandtheruntimetoprocessa
pair of point clouds. In practice, it scales linearly with the number of point clouds. Cells filled with a “-” indicate that the algorithm failed.
Metric Trans.Err(m) Abs.Yaw.Err(degree) Map/InputSize Runtime(ms)
Method CLIPPER LCDNet Ours CLIPPER LCDNet Ours CLIPPER(fullmaps) LCDNet(perscan) Ours(fullmaps) CLIPPER(CPU) LCDNet(perscanpaironGPU) Ours(CPU)
KITTI05 0.04 0.09 0.03 0.04 0.22 0.08 7.2KB 0.84MB 7.2KB 152 1580 40
KITTI07 0.06 0.05 0.09 0.01 0.21 0.09 7.3KB 0.84MB 7.3KB 202 1580 50
Forest - 1.10 0.13 - 0.1 2.6 16KB 0.84MB 16KB - 1580 209
requirements compared to methods operating on less compact establish loop closure in a “one-shot” manner. This may not
map representations. alwaysbeeffectiveincertainsituationswheretheenvironment
CLIPPER [34] serves as the data association backbone of is cluttered with the same semantic landmarks and similar
our SlideSLAM (SlideGraph) module. However, the original pairwise distances (e.g., two conference rooms with similar
CLIPPERlackssemanticinformationandreliesonexhaustive table and chair arrangements, or dense forests). Therefore, we
pairwise matching over all object pairs, resulting in high wouldliketoemployafiltering-basedapproachtoourcurrent
computational demands in complex scenes (e.g., each of loop closure strategy, where the best loop closure candidate
our forest maps consists of hundreds of landmarks). Our is chosen based on a maximum consensus of potential loop
SlideGraphenhancesCLIPPERbyusingsemanticclasslabels closure options. Lastly, our current place recognition and
andpolygon-descriptor-basedinitialdataassociation,enabling mapping formulation doesn’t account for dynamic objects.
us to significantly reduce the hypothesis space. CLIPPER Such objects (e.g., a car changing its parking spot over time)
is benchmarked on similar sequences on Semantic KITTI violate the pairwise distance consistency assumption required
as detailed in the previous section, and also on our forest for robust place recognition and can therefore induce faulty
dataset. The results are shown in Table VII. In challenging loopclosures.Inthefuture,wewouldliketoleveragesemantic
environmentssuchasforests,theoriginalCLIPPERalgorithm knowledge of objects, combined with intelligent agents such
encountered memory overflows due to the large number of as Large Language Models (LLMs), to better handle dynamic
landmarks,whichsignificantlyexpandedthehypothesisspace. objects. Using the semantic knowledge, an LLM can infer
Taketheforestenvironmentasanexample:apairofmapswith which objects can be dynamic in nature and automatically
approximately 300 and 800 landmarks would generate around filter them out during place recognition.
240,000 hypotheses. In contrast, our SlideGraph algorithm
prunesthisrawhypothesisspacedowntoapproximately3,000,
significantly reducing the size of the consistency graph by VII. CONCLUSION
2 orders of magnitude. As a result, SlideGraph consistently
Inthis work,we introduceareal-time decentralizedmetric-
achieved robust performance with lower memory usage and
semantic SLAM framework, along with its integration into
shorter runtimes.
autonomous exploration and navigation systems for aerial
and ground robots. This integrated system enables teams
VI. DISCUSSIONONLIMITATIONSANDFUTUREWORK
of heterogeneous robots to autonomously explore and col-
In this section, we address a few limitations of the current
laboratively construct maps with both geometric and open-
system and how they motivate our future work. Firstly, the
vocabulary semantic information across a variety of indoor
proposed sparse map representation is limited to three simple
and outdoor environments. The robots opportunistically lever-
shapes for modeling objects. While it helps maintain sparsity,
age communication to exchange sparse, lightweight semantic
the map may not always be visually informative with these
measurements, which are used for inter-robot localization and
shapes, and they may fail to model the finer metric details
map merging. Through a comprehensive set of real-world
for objects with complex shapes, which are needed for down-
experimentsinvolvingthreetypesofaerialandgroundrobots,
stream tasks such as robot manipulation. In addition, they
as well as benchmarks on publicly available datasets and
may lead to information loss that results in inaccuracies or
comparisons against existing methods, we demonstrate the
failures to identify loop closures, especially in environments
capabilities, effectiveness, and robustness of our system. Our
withambiguousorrepetitiveobjectlayouts.Semanticaliasing
runtimeandcommunicationanalysisalsoshowtheimportance
may also occur when different objects are represented by the
of using sparse semantic map representations, especially for
same primitive, increasing dependence on accurate semantic
large-scale (over 1 km) metric-semantic mapping tasks in
labeling. Misclassifications in such cases can cause errors.
challenginganddenseenvironments,suchasforestswithover
We are interested in investigating better map representations
1000 object landmarks.
that can model generic objects in detail while still maintain-
ing relative sparsity. Secondly, the current inter-robot loop
closure strategy does not follow a conventional “filtering”
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
approach, where multiple loop closures are first established
andthenaconsensusisformedtochoosethebestloopclosure We thankJie Mei forhis help withexperiments, Guilherme
result and filter out false positives. Currently, we only use V. Nardari, Ian D. Miller, Kashish Garg, Jeremy Wang, and
a sufficient inlier threshold to filter out false positives and Alex Zhou for the software and hardware support.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 19
REFERENCES [22] X.Chen,A.Milioto,E.Palazzolo,P.Giguere,J.Behley,andC.Stach-
niss,“Suma++:Efficientlidar-basedsemanticslam,”in2019IEEE/RSJ
[1] C. Campos, R. Elvira, J. J. G. Rodr´ıguez, J. M. M. Montiel, and International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
J. D. Tardo´s, “Orb-slam3: An accurate open-source library for visual, IEEE,2019,pp.4530–4537.
visual–inertial, and multimap slam,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, [23] D. Maturana, P.-W. Chou, M. Uenoyama, and S. Scherer, “Real-time
vol.37,no.6,pp.1874–1890,2021. semantic mapping for autonomous off-road navigation,” in Field and
[2] T.Shan,B.Englot,D.Meyers,W.Wang,C.Ratti,andD.Rus,“Lio-sam: Service Robotics, M. Hutter and R. Siegwart, Eds. Cham: Springer
Tightly-coupled lidar inertial odometry via smoothing and mapping,” InternationalPublishing,2018,pp.335–350.
in 2020 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and [24] I.D.Miller,A.Cowley,R.Konkimalla,S.S.Shivakumar,T.Nguyen,
systems(IROS). IEEE,2020,pp.5135–5142. T.Smith,C.J.Taylor,andV.Kumar,“Anywayyoulookatit:Semantic
[3] Y. Tao, X. Liu, I. Spasojevic, S. Agarwal, and V. Kumar, “3d active crossview localization and mapping with lidar,” IEEE Robotics and
metric-semanticslam,”IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,2024. AutomationLetters,vol.6,no.2,pp.2397–2404,2021.
[4] Y.Chang,N.Hughes,A.Ray,andL.Carlone,“Hydra-multi:Collabo- [25] I. D. Miller, F. Cladera, T. Smith, C. J. Taylor, and V. Kumar,
rative online construction of 3d scene graphs with multi-robot teams,” “Stronger together: Air-ground robotic collaboration using semantics,”
arXivpreprintarXiv:2304.13487,2023. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 9643–9650,
[5] X.Liu,A.Prabhu,F.Cladera,I.D.Miller,L.Zhou,C.J.Taylor,and 2022.
V.Kumar,“Activemetric-semanticmappingbymultipleaerialrobots,” [26] S.Chen,G.Nardari,E.Lee,C.Qu,X.Liu,R.Romero,andV.Kumar,
in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation “Sloam: Semantic lidar odometry and mapping for forest inventory,”
(ICRA). IEEE,2023,pp.3282–3288. IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.5,pp.1–1,012020.
[6] Y.Wu,Y.Zhang,D.Zhu,Z.Deng,W.Sun,X.Chen,andJ.Zhang,“An [27] N.Atanasov,S.L.Bowman,K.Daniilidis,andG.J.Pappas,“Aunifying
objectslamframeworkforassociation,mapping,andhigh-leveltasks,” view of geometry, semantics, and data association in slam.” in IJCAI,
IEEETransactionsonRobotics,2023. 2018,pp.5204–5208.
[7] Y. Tian, Y. Chang, F. Herrera Arias, C. Nieto-Granda, J. P. How, and [28] Q. Feng, Y. Meng, M. Shan, and N. Atanasov, “Localization and
L. Carlone, “Kimera-multi: Robust, distributed, dense metric-semantic mapping using instance-specific mesh models,” in 2019 IEEE/RSJ In-
slamformulti-robotsystems,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,vol.38, ternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),2019,
no.4,pp.2022–2038,2022. pp.4985–4991.
[8] X.Liu,G.V.Nardari,F.C.Ojeda,Y.Tao,A.Zhou,T.Donnelly,C.Qu, [29] J. Fu, Y. Du, K. Singh, J. B. Tenenbaum, and J. J. Leonard, “Neuse:
S.W.Chen,R.A.Romero,C.J.Taylor,etal.,“Large-scaleautonomous Neuralse(3)-equivariantembeddingforconsistentspatialunderstanding
flightwithreal-timesemanticSLAMunderdenseforestcanopy,”IEEE withobjects,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.07308,2023.
RoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.7,no.2,pp.5512–5519,2022. [30] E.Sucar,S.Liu,J.Ortiz,andA.J.Davison,“imap:Implicitmappingand
[9] M. Shan, Q. Feng, and N. Atanasov, “Orcvio: Object residual con- positioninginreal-time,”inProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFinternational
strainedvisual-inertialodometry,”in2020IEEE/RSJInternationalCon- conferenceoncomputervision,2021,pp.6229–6238.
ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2020, pp. [31] Z.Zhu,S.Peng,V.Larsson,W.Xu,H.Bao,Z.Cui,M.R.Oswald,and
5104–5111. M.Pollefeys,“Nice-slam:Neuralimplicitscalableencodingforslam,”
[10] S.YangandS.Scherer,“Cubeslam:Monocular3-dobjectslam,”IEEE in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
TransactionsonRobotics,vol.35,no.4,pp.925–938,2019. patternrecognition,2022,pp.12786–12796.
[11] L. Nicholson, M. Milford, and N. Su¨nderhauf, “Quadricslam: Dual [32] J. G. Mangelson, D. Dominic, R. M. Eustice, and R. Vasudevan,
quadrics from object detections as landmarks in object-oriented slam,” “Pairwise consistent measurement set maximization for robust multi-
IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.4,no.1,pp.1–8,2019. robotmapmerging,”in2018IEEEinternationalconferenceonrobotics
[12] S. Choudhary, L. Carlone, C. Nieto, J. Rogers, H. I. Christensen, andautomation(ICRA). IEEE,2018,pp.2916–2923.
andF.Dellaert,“Distributedmappingwithprivacyandcommunication [33] H.Yang,J.Shi,andL.Carlone,“Teaser:Fastandcertifiablepointcloud
constraints:Lightweightalgorithmsandobject-basedmodels,”2017. registration,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 314–
[13] S. L. Bowman, N. Atanasov, K. Daniilidis, and G. J. Pappas, “Proba- 333,2020.
bilisticdataassociationforsemanticslam,”in2017IEEEinternational [34] P. C. Lusk, K. Fathian, and J. P. How, “CLIPPER: A graph-theoretic
conferenceonroboticsandautomation(ICRA). IEEE,2017,pp.1722– framework for robust data association,” in 2021 IEEE International
1729. Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2021, pp.
[14] R.F.Salas-Moreno,R.A.Newcombe,H.Strasdat,P.H.Kelly,andA.J. 13828–13834.
Davison,“Slam++:Simultaneouslocalisationandmappingatthelevel [35] M.LeordeanuandM.Hebert,“Aspectraltechniqueforcorrespondence
ofobjects,”in2013IEEEConferenceonComputerVisionandPattern problemsusingpairwiseconstraints,”inTenthIEEEInternationalCon-
Recognition,2013,pp.1352–1359. ferenceonComputerVision(ICCV’05)Volume1,vol.2. IEEE,2005,
[15] A.Cunningham,M.Paluri,andF.Dellaert,“Ddf-sam:Fullydistributed pp.1482–1489.
slamusingconstrainedfactorgraphs,”in2010IEEE/RSJInternational [36] X.Xu,S.Lu,J.Wu,H.Lu,Q.Zhu,Y.Liao,R.Xiong,andY.Wang,
ConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems. IEEE,2010,pp.3025– “Ring++: Roto-translation invariant gram for global localization on a
3030. sparse scan map,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 6, pp.
[16] A. Cunningham, V. Indelman, and F. Dellaert, “Ddf-sam 2.0: Consis- 4616–4635,2023.
tent distributed smoothing and mapping,” in 2013 IEEE international [37] D. Cattaneo, M. Vaghi, and A. Valada, “Lcdnet: Deep loop closure
conferenceonroboticsandautomation. IEEE,2013,pp.5220–5227. detectionandpointcloudregistrationforlidarslam,”IEEETransactions
[17] A. Rosinol, A. Violette, M. Abate, N. Hughes, Y. Chang, J. Shi, onRobotics,vol.38,no.4,pp.2074–2093,2022.
A. Gupta, and L. Carlone, “Kimera: From slam to spatial perception [38] A. Gawel, C. D. Don, R. Y. Siegwart, J. I. Nieto, and C. Cadena,
with3ddynamicscenegraphs,”TheInternationalJournalofRobotics “X-view:Graph-basedsemanticmultiviewlocalization,”IEEERobotics
Research,vol.40,no.12-14,pp.1510–1546,2021. and Automation Letters, vol. 3, pp. 1687–1694, 2017. [Online].
[18] Q. Gu, A. Kuwajerwala, S. Morin, K. M. Jatavallabhula, B. Sen, Available:https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3337551
A.Agarwal,C.Rivera,W.Paul,K.Ellis,R.Chellappa,etal.,“Concept- [39] X.Guo,J.Hu,J.Chen,D.Fuqin,andT.L.Lam,“Semantichistogram
graphs:Open-vocabulary3dscenegraphsforperceptionandplanning,” based graph matching for real-time multi-robot global localization
in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation in large scale environment,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
(ICRA). IEEE,2024,pp.5021–5028. vol.PP,pp.1–1,022021.
[19] C. Cadena, L. Carlone, H. Carrillo, Y. Latif, D. Scaramuzza, J. Neira, [40] G.V.Nardari,A.Cohen,S.W.Chen,X.Liu,V.Arcot,R.A.Romero,
I. Reid, and J. J. Leonard, “Past, present, and future of simultaneous andV.Kumar,“Placerecognitioninforestswithurquharttessellations,”
localization and mapping: Toward the robust-perception age,” IEEE IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.6,no.2,pp.279–286,2020.
Transactionsonrobotics,vol.32,no.6,pp.1309–1332,2016. [41] D. Galvez-Lo´pez and J. D. Tardos, “Bags of binary words for fast
[20] M.Grinvald,F.Furrer,T.Novkovic,J.J.Chung,C.Cadena,R.Siegwart, placerecognitioninimagesequences,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,
and J. Nieto, “Volumetric instance-aware semantic mapping and 3d vol.28,no.5,pp.1188–1197,2012.
objectdiscovery,”IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.4,no.3, [42] N. Hughes, Y. Chang, and L. Carlone, “Hydra: A real-time spatial
pp.3037–3044,2019. perception system for 3d scene graph construction and optimization,”
[21] J. Mccormac, R. Clark, M. Bloesch, A. Davison, and S. Leutenegger, 2022.
“Fusion++: Volumetric object-level slam,” in 2018 International Con- [43] R.Dube´,A.Gawel,H.Sommer,J.Nieto,R.Siegwart,andC.Cadena,
ferenceon3DVision(3DV),2018,pp.32–41. “An online multi-robot slam system for 3d lidars,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 20
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), with autonomous aerial robots,” Mechanical Systems and Signal
2017,pp.1004–1011. Processing, vol. 208, p. 111050, 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
[44] Y.Chang,K.Ebadi,C.Denniston,M.Ginting,A.Rosinol,A.Reinke, //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0888327023009585
M. Palieri, J. Shi, A. Chatterjee, B. Morrell, A.-a. Agha-mohammadi, [66] Y. Tao, Y. Wu, B. Li, F. Cladera, A. Zhou, D. Thakur, and V. Kumar,
and L. Carlone, “Lamp 2.0: A robust multi-robot slam system for “SEER: Safe efficient exploration for aerial robots using learning to
operation in challenging large-scale underground environments,” IEEE predict information gain,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on
RoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.7,pp.1–8,102022. RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,2023,pp.1235–1241.
[45] P.-Y. Lajoie, B. Ramtoula, Y. Chang, L. Carlone, and G. Beltrame, [67] N. Michael, J. Fink, and V. Kumar, “Experimental testbed for large
“Door-slam: Distributed, online, and outlier resilient slam for robotic multirobotteams,”IEEErobotics&automationmagazine,vol.15,no.1,
teams,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. PP, pp. 1–1, 01 pp.53–61,2008.
2020.
[46] Y. Huang, T. Shan, F. Chen, and B. Englot, “Disco-slam: Distributed
scancontext-enabledmulti-robotlidarslamwithtwo-stageglobal-local
IX. AUTHOR’SBIOGRAPHYSECTION
graph optimization,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7,
no.2,pp.1150–1157,2022.
[47] P.-Y. Lajoie and G. Beltrame, “Swarm-slam: Sparse decentralized col- XuLiureceivedtheM.S.E.degreeinRoboticsand
laborativesimultaneouslocalizationandmappingframeworkformulti- the Ph.D. degree in Mechanical Engineering and
robot systems,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 1, AppliedMechanicsfromtheGeneralRobotics,Au-
pp.475–482,2024. tomation, Sensing, and Perception (GRASP) Labo-
[48] T. Cieslewski, S. Choudhary, and D. Scaramuzza, “Data-efficient de- ratory,UniversityofPennsylvania,Philadelphia,PA,
centralized visual slam,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on USA,in2019and2024,respectively.HewasaPost-
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),2018,pp.2466–2473. doctoral Scholar at Stanford University, Stanford,
[49] Y.Tian,K.Khosoussi,D.M.Rosen,andJ.P.How,“Distributedcertifi- CA,USA.HeiscurrentlyaSeniorAppliedScientist
ablycorrectpose-graphoptimization,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics, atMicrosoft,Redmond,WA,USA.Hisresearchin-
vol.37,no.6,pp.2137–2156,2021. terestsincludemetric-semanticSLAM,autonomous
[50] S.Choudhary,L.Carlone,C.Nieto,J.Rogers,Z.Liu,H.I.Christensen, UAVs,andfoundationmodelsforrobotics.
andF.Dellaert,“Multirobotobject-basedslam,”in2016International
SymposiumonExperimentalRobotics. Springer,2017,pp.729–741.
[51] S. Choudhary, L. Carlone, C. Nieto, J. Rogers, H. I. Christensen, and Jiuzhou Lei received his bachelor’s degree in
F. Dellaert, “Distributed trajectory estimation with privacy and com- Mechanical Engineering from Sichuan University,
municationconstraints:Atwo-stagedistributedgauss-seidelapproach,” Chengdu, China in 2021 and the M.S.E. degree in
in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation RoboticsfromtheGRASPLaboratory,Universityof
(ICRA),2016,pp.5261–5268. Pennsylvania,Philadelphia,PA,USAin2023.Heis
[52] I. Deutsch, M. Liu, and R. Siegwart, “A framework for multi-robot currentlyaPh.D.studentinMechanicalEngineering
posegraphslam,”in2016IEEEInternationalConferenceonReal-time at Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas,
ComputingandRobotics(RCAR),2016,pp.567–572. USA.Heworksonrobotautonomy,general-purpose
[53] G.Georgakis,B.Bucher,K.Schmeckpeper,S.Singh,andK.Daniilidis, roboticmanipulation,andnavigation.
“Learning to map for active semantic goal navigation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.15648,2021.
[54] L. Zheng, C. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Zhao, H. Huang, M. Niessner, and
K.Xu,“Activesceneunderstandingviaonlinesemanticreconstruction,”
in Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 38, no. 7. Wiley Online Library, AnkitPrabhureceivedtheB.Tech.degreeinCom-
2019,pp.103–114. puter Science and Engineering from SRM Univer-
[55] J.A.Placed,J.Strader,H.Carrillo,N.Atanasov,V.Indelman,L.Car- sity,Chennai,India,in2021,andtheM.S.E.degree
lone,andJ.A.Castellanos,“Asurveyonactivesimultaneouslocalization inRoboticsfromtheGRASPLaboratory,University
andmapping:Stateoftheartandnewfrontiers,”IEEETransactionson of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, in 2023.
Robotics,2023. He is currently a Research Scientist at the Kumar-
[56] A.AsgharivaskasiandN.Atanasov,“Activebayesianmulti-classmap- Robotics lab, and his research focuses on metric-
pingfromrangeandsemanticsegmentationobservations,”in2021IEEE semanticSLAMandrobotautonomy.
InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,
2021,pp.1–7.
[57] ——,“Semanticoctreemappingandshannonmutualinformationcom-
putationforrobotexploration,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,vol.39,
no.3,pp.1910–1928,2023.
YuezhanTaoreceivedtheB.Eng.(Hons.)degreein
[58] M. Kaess, H. Johannsson, R. Roberts, V. Ila, J. J. Leonard, and
computerscienceandengineeringfromTheChinese
F.Dellaert,“isam2:Incrementalsmoothingandmappingusingthebayes
tree,”TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch,vol.31,no.2,pp. University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong,
China, in 2019, the M.S.E degree in computer and
216–235,2012.
information science from the University of Penn-
[59] F. Dellaert and GTSAM Contributors, “borglab/gtsam,” May 2022.
sylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA in 2021. He is
[Online].Available:https://github.com/borglab/gtsam)
currently a Ph.D student in computer and informa-
[60] A.Milioto,I.Vizzo,J.Behley,andC.Stachniss,“Rangenet++:Fastand
accuratelidarsemanticsegmentation,”in2019IEEE/RSJInternational tion science with the University of Pennsylvania,
ConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,2019,pp. Philadelphia, PA, USA. His research focuses on
activeperception,withanemphasisonmappingand
4213–4220.
motionplanningforautonomousroboticsystems.
[61] I. D. Miller and A. Prabhu. Semantic Integrated LIDAR Labelling.
[Online].Available:https://github.com/ankitVP77/sill
[62] G.Jocher,A.Chaurasia,andJ.Qiu,“YOLObyUltralytics,”Jan.2023.
[Online].Available:https://github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics IgorSpasojevicisanAssistantProfessorattheUni-
[63] T. Cheng, L. Song, Y. Ge, W. Liu, X. Wang, and Y. Shan, “Yolo- versityofCalifornia,Riverside.BeforejoiningUCR,
world: Real-time open-vocabulary object detection,” in Proceedings of hewasapostdoctoralscholarintheGRASPLabora-
theIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,
toryattheUniversityofPennsylvania,Philadelphia,
2024,pp.16901–16911. PA. He received his Ph.D. from the Massachusetts
[64] H.W.Kuhn,“Thehungarianmethodfortheassignmentproblem,”Naval InstituteofTechnology,andhismaster’sandbache-
researchlogisticsquarterly,vol.2,no.1-2,pp.83–97,1955.
lorofartsdegreesfromtheUniversityofCambridge.
[65] A. Prabhu, X. Liu, I. Spasojevic, Y. Wu, Y. Shao, D. Ong, His interests focus on optimization algorithms in
J. Lei, P. C. Green, P. Chaudhari, and V. Kumar, “UAVs robotics, including topics such as motion planning,
for forestry: Metric-semantic mapping and diameter estimation activesensing,andautonomousexploration.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONROBOTICS.PREPRINTVERSION.ACCEPTEDSEPTEMBER2025 21
PratikChaudhariisanAssistantProfessorinElec-
trical and Systems Engineering and Computer and
InformationScienceattheUniversityofPennsylva-
nia.HeisacorememberoftheGRASPLaboratory.
From2018-19,hewasaSeniorAppliedScientistat
Amazon Web Services and a Postdoctoral Scholar
in Computing and Mathematical Sciences at the
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA,
USA. He received his PhD in Computer Science
from University of California, Los Angeles, CA,
USA, in 2018, and his Master’s and Engineer’s
degrees in Aeronautics and Astronautics from Massachusetts Institute of
Technology,Cambridge,MA,USA,in2012and2014,respectively.Hewas
a part of NuTonomy Inc. (now Hyundai-Aptiv Motional) from 2014-16. He
is the recipient of the Amazon Machine Learning Research Award in 2020,
National Science Foundation CAREER award in 2022 and the Intel Rising
StarFacultyAwardin2022.
NikolayAtanasov(SeniorMember,IEEE)received
aB.S.degreeinElectricalEngineeringfromTrinity
College,Hartford,CT,USA,in2008,andM.S.and
Ph.D.degreesinElectricalandSystemsEngineering
from the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA, USA in 2012 and 2015, respectively. He is
an Associate Professor of Electrical and Computer
Engineering with the University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. His research focuses
onprobabilisticmodelsforsimultaneouslocalization
and mapping (SLAM) and on optimal control and
reinforcement learning algorithms for minimizing model uncertainty. Dr.
Atanasov was the recipient of the Joseph and Rosaline Wolf award for the
bestPh.D.dissertationinElectricalandSystemsEngineeringattheUniversity
of Pennsylvania in 2015, the Best Conference Paper Award at the IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) in 2017, the
NSF CAREER Award in 2021, and the IEEE RAS Early Academic Career
AwardinRoboticsandAutomationin2023.
Vijay Kumar (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in mechanical engineering from the Ohio
StateUniversity,Columbus,OH,USA,in1987.He
is currently the Nemirovsky Family Dean of Penn
Engineering (with appointments) with the Depart-
ment of Mechanical Engineering and Applied Me-
chanics,theDepartmentofComputerandInforma-
tion Science, and the Department of Electrical and
Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. From 2012 to 2014, he
was the Assistant Director of Robotics and Cyber
Physical Systems with the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy. has served on the editorial boards of the IEEE Transactions on
Robotics and Automation, IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and
Engineering,ASMEJournalofMechanicalDesign,andtheSpringerTractin
AdvancedRobotics(STAR),andwasthechiefeditorfortheASMEJournal
ofMechanismsandRobotics.HehaswonbestpaperawardsatDARS2002,
ICRA2004,ICRA2011,RSS2011,RSS2013,ICRA2014,BICT2015,and
MARSS2016andhasadviseddoctoralstudentswhohavewonBestStudent
PaperAwardsatICRA2008,RSS2009,andDARS2010.Hewasrecognized
with the RSS Time of Test Award in 2025. Additionally, he is the recipient
of the 2013 Popular Mechanics Breakthrough Award, a 2014 Engelberger
Robotics Award, the 2017 IEEE Robotics and Automation Society George
SaridisLeadershipAward,the2018IEEERoboticsandAutomationPioneer
Award, and the 2020 IEEE Robotics and Automation Field Award. He was
elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 2013, the American
Philosophical Society in 2018, and the American Academy of Arts and
SciencesandtheNationalAcademyofInventorsin2022.
