IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS 1
Generative Diffusion Model Enhanced MADRL
for Distributed Flocking With Obstacle
Avoidance of Fixed-Wing AAV Swarms
Chao Y an , Member, IEEE , Yuna Jiang , Member, IEEE , Mou Chen , Fellow, IEEE , Xiaojia Xiang ,
and Xiangke Wang , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —The distributed ﬂocking control of ﬁxed-wing
autonomous aerial vehicle (AAV) swarms in unknown andcluttered environments poses signiﬁcant challenges dueto their complex dynamics and nonholonomic constraints.While multiagent deep reinforcement learning (MADRL) hasshown success in coordinating AAVs, existing approachesoften struggle to capture the multimodal action distribu-tions essential for robust obstacle avoidance under uncer-tainty. In this article, we propose a novel generative dif-fusion model enhanced MADRL approach for distributedﬂocking control and obstacle avoidance in ﬁxed-wing AAVswarms. Speciﬁcally, we design a diffusion-based policynetwork, where individual observations are processed viaa graph attention network and used as conditions for gen-erating optimal actions in the reverse denoising process.To update the diffusion policy, a graph attention networkis also incorporated into the value network to effectivelyextract relevant information from all agents, thereby im-proving the accuracy of the Q-value estimation. The resultsof numerical simulations and hardware-in-the-loop experi-ments demonstrate that our approach signiﬁcantly outper-forms existing baselines in terms of ﬂocking stability and
collision rate, highlighting the potential of diffusion models
for scalable and robust AAV ﬂocking control.
Index Terms —Fixed-wing autonomous aerial vehicle
(AAV) swarm, ﬂocking control, generative diffusion model(GDM), multiagent deep reinforcement learning (MADRL),obstacle avoidance.
Received 22 May 2025; revised 14 October 2025; accepted 27 De-
cember 2025. Recommended by Technical Editor Z. Ji and Senior Editor
H. Fujimoto. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62403240, Grant 62533012,and Grant T2521006 and in part by the Natural Science Foundation ofJiangsu Province under Grant BK20241396. (Corresponding author:
Mou Chen.)
Chao Y an and Mou Chen are with the College of Automation En-
gineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nan-
jing 211106, China (e-mail: yanchao@nuaa.edu.cn; chenmou@nuaa.
edu.cn).
Yuna Jiang is with the School of Communications and Information En-
gineering, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing
210003, China (e-mail: yunajiang@njupt.edu.cn).
Xiaojia Xiang and Xiangke Wang are with the College of Intelli-
gence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Tech-nology, Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: xiangxiaojia@nudt.edu.cn;
xkwang@nudt.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TMECH.2026.3652629.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TMECH.2026.3652629I. INTRODUCTION
AUTONOMOUS aerial vehicle (AA V) swarms show im-
mense promise across a wide range of critical applications,
from security patrol [1]and emergency communication [2]to
urban air mobility [3]and advanced air mobility [4],[5]. Hence,
cooperative control techniques that coordinate a swarm of in-
dividual AA Vs to accomplish complex tasks in a decentralized
manner have become a hot research topic [6],[7]. Among the
various approaches to cooperative control, distributed ﬂocking
offers a scalable and decentralized solution for maintaining
formation coherence [8],[9], while obstacle avoidance ensures
mission safety in complex environments. However, achieving
ﬂocking control with obstacle avoidance remains a huge chal-
lenge for AA V swarms, particularly when the sensing capabilityof each AA V is limited.
Traditional methods for achieving ﬂocking and obstacle
avoidance in AA V swarms, such as those based on Reynolds’
rules [10],[11] or potential ﬁeld methods [9],[12], often suf-
fer from several limitations. These methods typically rely onhandcrafted rules and parameters that can be challenging to
tune optimally for complex and unknown environments. Fur-
thermore, traditional methods can be brittle when faced withunforeseen situations, such as novel obstacle conﬁgurations
or environmental changes. These methods often struggle with
adaptability, resulting in issues, such as convergence to localminima, oscillatory behaviors, or even collisions. These chal-
lenges motivate the adoption of more adaptive, learning-based
approaches that can continuously optimize swarm behavior inresponse to environmental changes.
In recent years, deep reinforcement learning (DRL), including
multiagent deep reinforcement learning (MADRL) [13],[14],
has become increasingly popular because of its superiority in
model-free, ﬂexibility, and computational costs [15]. Many re-
searchers have successfully applied DRL for ﬂocking control.For example, Shi et al. [16] designed a ﬂocking controller for
multiple AA Vs in network-constrained environments by inte-
grating heuristic guides with the twin delayed deep deterministic
policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm. Xiao et al. [17] proposed the
multiagent cooperative soft actor–critic algorithm for ﬂockingcontrol with obstacle avoidance under stochastic communica-
tion conditions. Jia et al. [18] developed an asymmetric self-
play-empowered DRL framework for robust multirobot ﬂocking
1083-4435 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologi es.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index. html
for more information.This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS
control in dynamic scenarios with environmental interferes.
However, the above-mentioned studies only focus on particle-
based agents, such as rotary AA Vs or omnidirectional robots,which can hover or maneuver freely. Consequently, their meth-
ods are not applicable for ﬁxed-wing AA Vs that operate under
more restrictive dynamics [19].
Fixed-wing AA Vs present unique challenges due to their
nonholonomic motion constraints, high-speed dynamics, and
limited maneuverability [20],[21]. As a result, learning reliable
ﬂocking and obstacle avoidance policies becomes signiﬁcantly
more complicated. DRL has shown promise in achieving cooper-
ative control of ﬁxed-wing AA Vs in related tasks. For example,Ma et al. [22] developed a DDPG-based control framework,
enabling ﬁxed-wing AA Vs to adapt to complex formations
while avoiding collisions. Zhuang et al. [23] proposed a proxi-
mal policy optimization based autonomous penetration method
for high-speed ﬁxed-wing AA Vs against multiple interceptors.
However, few efforts have been dedicated speciﬁcally to ﬂockingcontrol for ﬁxed-wing AA V swarms. Notable exceptions include
our previous work [24],[25], where we designed a multiagent
DDPG based distributed ﬂocking framework with attention
mechanisms for ﬁxed-wing AA Vs in cluttered environments.
Nevertheless, the aforementioned methods typically rely oneither deterministic policies or unimodal Gaussian policies. This
reliance limits their ability to learn diverse and adaptive ﬂocking
behaviors in complex environments, especially when multiplefeasible paths or maneuvers are available around obstacles.
Motivated by these limitations, we turn our attention to gener-
ative diffusion models (GDMs) as a potential solution. Diffusionmodels have recently emerged as powerful generative models
capable of capturing complex, multimodal distributions by pro-
gressively denoising random noise into structured outputs [26],
[27]. Unlike unimodal Gaussian policies, diffusion models nat-
urally support multimodal action generation, enabling agents
to explore and exploit multiple plausible behaviors conditionedon the environment [28],[29]. This property is particularly
advantageous for ﬂocking control of ﬁxed-wing AA V swarms,
where AA Vs may need to consider diverse maneuver options in
the presence of dynamic obstacles and limited maneuverability.
In this article, we propose a novel GDM enhanced MADRL
approach for distributed ﬂocking control and obstacle avoid-
ance of ﬁxed-wing AA V swarms. The core insight behind the
proposed approach is the design of a generative diffusion pol-icy model that conditions on local observations and generates
diverse, coordinated actions for each AA V in a decentralized
manner. By integrating the generative capability of diffusionmodels into the policy learning process, our approach enables
ﬁxed-wing AA Vs to maintain cohesive ﬂocks while navigating
safely through complex, cluttered environments. Extensive ex-periments validate the superiority of our approach over existing
MADRL baselines in terms of ﬂocking stability and collision
rate.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to address the
distributed ﬂocking control problem for a scalable ﬁxed-wing
AA V swarm in unknown and obstacle-rich environments using
the GDMs. The main contributions of this article are summarized
as follows.Fig. 1. Scalable swarm of ﬁxed-wing AAVs consisting of one unique
leader and nidentical followers. d1,...,d 9denote the distances be-
tween the follower and the surrounding obstacles in nine directions
measured by the distance sensor.
1) A novel multiagent actor–critic reinforcement learning
approach enhanced by a GDM is proposed for achieving
robust distributed ﬂocking control and effective obstacleavoidance with a scalable ﬁxed-wing AA V swarm.
2) A generative diffusion policy model is designed to gener-
ate diverse and coordinated actions, where local neighborinformation is processed by a graph attention network
(GAT) and utilized as the conditional input to the diffusion
model.
3) Hardware-in-the-loop (HITL) experiments and extensive
numerical simulations are conducted to comprehensivelyvalidate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed
approach for ﬂocking control.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
formulates the distributed ﬂocking control and obstacle avoid-
ance problem. Section IIIproposes the GDM enhanced MADRL
approach, followed by the experiment results in Section IV.
Finally, Section Vconcludes this article.
II. P
ROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the distributed ﬂocking and
obstacle avoidance problem for a scalable swarm of ﬁxed-wing
AA Vs, and then formulate it as a decentralized partially observ-able Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP).
A. Problem Statement
In the considered ﬂocking scenario, a scalable swarm of
ﬁxed-wing AA Vs operates within a 2-D environment clutteredwith multiple obstacles (see Fig. 1). The swarm consists of a
unique leader followed by a dynamic set of identical followers
denoted by I:={1,2,...,n}, where the number of followers n
is variable. The state of the follower ican be described by the tu-
pleξ
i:= (xi,yi,ψi,φi,vi), representing the plane coordinates,
heading angle, roll angle, and airspeed, respectively. Similarly,the leader’s state can be denoted as ξ
l:= (xl,yl,ψl,φl,vl).T h e
objective is to design a distributed ﬂocking control policy that
allows a ﬂexible number of followers to ﬂock with the leaderwhile actively avoiding collisions with obstacles.This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
YAN et al.: GDM ENHANCED MADRL FOR DISTRIBUTED FLOCKING WITH OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE OF FIXED-WING AAV SWARMS 3
We assumed that all followers are equipped with identical and
limited sensing capabilities. Each follower can only perceive the
states of nearby agents within its sensing range Rc. Accordingly,
the neighbor set of follower iis deﬁned as
Ni:={j|ρi,j<Rc,j∈I,j/negationslash=i} (1)
whereρi,jis the distance between follower iand follower j.
In addition, each follower carries a nine-beam sparse distance
sensor covering a 180◦ﬁeld-of-view to detect nearby obstacles.
Denote the information measured by the distance sensor offollowerias
d
i:= [di,1,...,d i,m,...,d i,9] (2)
wheredi,mis the distance in the mth beam direction.
B. Dec-POMDP Model
1) Observation Space: All the followers have the same ob-
servation space. The observation of each follower i∈I can be
deﬁned as
oi:= (ξl,ξi,ξNi,di) (3)
whereξlis the leader’s state; ξiis the follower i’s state;ξNi:=
{ξj|j∈Ni}is the set of states of follower i’s neighbors; di
indicates the distance information measured by the follower i.
2) Action Space: All follower share the same continuous
action space. For each follower i, the action is deﬁned as ai=
(ωi,ui), whereωi∈[−ωmax,ωmax]represents the roll com-
mand, and ui∈[−umax,umax]denotes the speed command.
These high-level control commands are subsequently executedby the AA V’s low-level autopilot according to the following
dynamics [24],[30]:
˙ξ
i=d
dt⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩x
i
yi
ψi
φi
vi⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭=⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩v
icosψi+ηx
visinψi+ηy
−αg
vitanφi+ηψ
fφ(φi,ωi)
fv(vi,ui)⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭(4)
whereα
gdenotes the gravitational acceleration, and ηx,ηy,
ηψrepresent the environmental disturbances in the x,y, and
heading angle channels, respectively. The functions fφ(·)and
fv(·)describe the closed-loop roll and airspeed dynamics [31].
3) Reward Function: In the ﬂocking with obstacle avoidance
task, each follower aims to minimize its distance to the leader
while avoiding collisions with neighboring AA Vs and surround-
ing obstacles [24]. Accordingly, the reward function is designed
as a weighted sum of multiple objectives
ri=rfol
i+|Ni|/summationdisplay
j=1rcol
i,j+9/summationdisplay
m=1robs
i,m (5)
where
rfol
i=⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩−Pρ
i,l≤Rs
λ1/parenleftbig
1−ep1(Ra−ρi,l)/parenrightbig
Rs<ρi,l≤Ra
λ2/parenleftbig
1−ep2(ρi,l−Ra)/parenrightbig
Ra<ρi,l≤Rl
−Kρ i,l>Rl(6)rcol
i,j=⎧
⎨
⎩−Pρ i,j≤Rs
λ1/parenleftbig
1−ep1(Ra−ρi,j)/parenrightbig
Rs<ρi,j≤Ra
0 ρi,j>Ra(7)
robs
i,m=⎧
⎨
⎩−Pd i,m≤Rs
λ1/parenleftbig
1−ep1(Ra−di,m)/parenrightbig
Rs<di,m≤Ra
0 di,m>Ra(8)
denote the following reward ,inter-AAV collision avoidance
reward , and environmental obstacle avoidance reward , respec-
tively. Here, ρi,lis the distance from the leader to follower i,Rl
is the maximum communication range of the leader, RaandRs
are the alert radius and minimum safety radius of followers,
respectively. λ1>0 and λ2>0 are two weight coefﬁcients;
k1andk2are two small positive constants, while Kis a large
positive constant.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
To address the distributed ﬂocking with obstacle avoidance
problem, we propose a novel generative diffusion model en-hanced multiagent actor–critic (GDMAAC) algorithm. As illus-
trated in Fig. 2, the GDMAAC algorithm comprises two main
components: the diffusion-based policy network (actor) and thegraph-based value network (critic). The actor is responsible for
learning the individual policies for each agent (follower) by
leveraging the GDM [26], while the critic is used to evalu-
ate the joint actions of all agents by utilizing the GAT [32].
The policy and value networks operate under the centralizedtraining with decentralized execution paradigm [33].D u r i n g
training, global state from all agents is utilized to learn optimal
policies and value functions. However, during execution, eachagent acts independently based on its own local observations
and its learned decentralized policy. In the following, we ﬁrst
introduce the diffusion-based policy network (see Section III-A )
and the graph-based value network (see Section III-B ), respec-
tively. Afterward, we describe the learning process in detail
(see Section III-C ).
A. Diffusion-Based Policy Network
In order to enhance exploration and robustness in dynamic and
uncertain environments, we design the diffusion-based policy
network to generate optimal actions based on the observationsof each agent. Speciﬁcally, the policy network utilizes a GDM
to generate diverse actions through a denoising process, con-
ditioned on the observations processed by a GAT. Below, weﬁrst introduce the GAT-based observation encoder and then the
reverse denoising process in GDM.
1) Observation Encoder: In the policy network, the obser-
vation encoder is designed to process the observation of each
agent. As indicated by (3), the length of the agent’s observation
is positively correlated with the number of its neighbors within
the observation range. Since the number of neighbors is dynamic
and varies over time, it is crucial to develop a network modulethat can handle these varying numbers of neighbors and convert
them into a ﬁxed-length feature vector. To achieve this, we design
an observation encoder based on GAT, which allows for thedynamic processing of the agent’s observation while ensuringThis article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS
Fig. 2. Framework of GDMAAC. The actor leverages the GDM to generate diverse actions, while the critic utilizes the GAT to process and
aggregate information from all agents. Here, the symbol Cdenotes the concatenation operation.
that the output embedding remains of a ﬁxed size regardless of
the number of neighbors.
We detail here the implementation process of the observation
encoder. We ﬁrst use four embedding layers to separately extractthe features of the leader’s state, ego state, neighbors’ states, and
the distance sensor’s information
e
t
l=F C (ξt
l),et
i=F C (ξt
i)
et
j=F C (ξt
i),j∈Nt
i
et
d= FC(Flatten( dt
i)) (9)
where FC(·)represents a fully connected layer, Flatten(·)
denotes the ﬂatten operation.
We then aggregate the embedding of neighbors’ states into
a ﬁxed-length vector through a GAT layer. Mathematically, the
aggregation process can be formulated as
ht
i=/summationdisplay
j∈Niαt
ijWneietj(10)
whereht
irepresents the aggregated embedding of the neighbors’
states for agent iat timestep t.Wneiis the learnable weight ma-
trix that projects each et
jinto a higher dimensional feature space,
αt
ijis the attention weight between agent iand its neighbor j,
indicating the importance of j’s state in the aggregation process.
Formally, the attention weight αt
ijis computed by the following
attention mechanism [32]:
αt
ij=exp(st
ij)/summationtext
j∈Niexp(st
ij)
st
ij=a/latticetopLeakyReLU/parenleftbig/bracketleftbig
Wegoet
i+Wneiet
j/bracketrightbig/parenrightbig
(11)wherest
ijdenote the similarity score; ais the learnable attention
weight vector; Wegois the learnable weight matrix that projects
et
iinto a higher dimensional feature space; LeakyReLU( ·)
represents the LeakyReLU activation function used to introduce
nonlinearity.
After aggregating the neighbors’ states, the ﬁnal feature vec-
tor for agent i’s observation is obtained by concatenating the
following embedding vectors:
ct
i=et
l||et
i||ht
i||et
d (12)
where||denotes the concatenation operation, ct
iis the ﬁnal
aggregated feature vector for agent i, which is used as the
conditional input for the diffusion model to generate actions.
2) Reverse Denoising Process: After encoding the agent’s
observation information, the policy network generates actions
using a diffusion model, such as the denoising diffusion prob-abilistic model [26]. As a class of generative models, diffusion
models have shown strong generative capabilities across various
domains by progressively reﬁning random noise into structured
outputs. By leveraging these capabilities, the diffusion-based
policy network can generate diverse and high-quality actionsfor complex multiagent coordination tasks.
In the proposed GDMAAC framework, only the reverse de-
noising process is adopted to serve as the policy generator. Inconventional diffusion models, the forward process is a ﬁxed,
nonlearnable Markov chain used to progressively add Gaussian
noise to a dataset of expert samples, providing supervision forlearning the reverse process. However, in our online multiagent
reinforcement learning setting, such expert data are unavailable,
as optimal actions must be discovered through continuous inter-action with the environment. Consequently, the forward processThis article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
YAN et al.: GDM ENHANCED MADRL FOR DISTRIBUTED FLOCKING WITH OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE OF FIXED-WING AAV SWARMS 5
is omitted [34],[35]. Instead, the reverse process is directly em-
ployed to iteratively reﬁne Gaussian noise into optimal actions.
This design allows the diffusion-based policy network to actas a generative policy model that learns through trial-and-error
optimization rather than supervised reconstruction.
Formally, the reverse denoising process aims to generate the
optimal action a
t
i,0by iteratively reﬁning the Gaussian noise
at
i,K∼N(0,I)throughKdenoising step, conditional on the
observation encoder’s output ct
i. Speciﬁcally, this process is
modeled as follows [26]:
pθ/parenleftbig
at
i,k−1|at
i,k/parenrightbig
=N/parenleftBig
at
i,k−1;μθ(at
i,k,k,cti),˜βtI/parenrightBig
(13)
wherek=K,..., 1 represents the reverse diffusion timestep
(distinct from the trajectory timestep, which is indicated by
the subscript t),pθ(at
i,k−1|at
i,k)denotes a Gaussian distribution
deﬁning the transition from at
i,ktoat
i,k−1. The adjusted variance
of the distribution pθ(at
i,k−1|at
i,k)is calculated by
˜βk=1−¯αk−1
1−¯αkβk (14)
whereβk∈(0,1)is a predetermined variance factor which con-
trols the noise scale at timestep k,αk=1−βk,¯αk=/producttextk
s=1αs.
The mean μθ(at
i,k,k,ct
i)of the reverse transition distribution can
be constructed leveraging a noise prediction network
μθ(at
i,k,k,cti)=1√αk/parenleftbigg
at
i,k−βk√1−¯αk/epsilon1θ/parenleftbig
at
i,k,k,cti/parenrightbig/parenrightbigg
.
(15)
The noise prediction network /epsilon1θapproximates the noise com-
ponent conditioned on ct
i
/epsilon1θ(at
i,k,k,cti)=M L P /epsilon1/parenleftbig
at
i,k||PE(k)||ct
i/parenrightbig
(16)
where MLP(·)denotes a multilayer perceptron (MLP), PE(k)
denotes the sinusoidal positional encoding of timestep k.
Finally, we can obtain an action by drawing samples from the
learned reverse transition distribution with the reparameteriza-
tion trick
at
i,k−1=μθ(at
i,k,k,cti)+/radicalBig
˜βt/epsilon1 (17)
where/epsilon1∼N(0,I)is a noise term drawn from a normal distri-
bution. By iterating through this sample process, the agent cangenerate the optimal action (denoised action a
t
i,0).
B. Graph-Based Value Network
To evaluate the actions of all agents and promote cooperative
behavior, we construct a centralized value network based on
GAT. The graph-based value network can effectively capturethe relational dependencies among agents by modeling them
as nodes in an interaction graph. Each node encodes its own
observation and action information, and the GAT module ag-gregates messages from neighbors to compute the ﬁnal Q-value
estimation. In this section, we detail the design of the value
network, which comprises two modules: the observation–actionencoder and Q-value estimation with GAT.1) Observation-Action Encoder: The input to the value net-
work consists of each agent’s local observation and its executed
action. To construct a meaningful representation that capturesboth the state and action information, we design an encoder that
processes these inputs and maps them into a ﬁxed-dimensional
embedding.
For each agent iat timestep t, we ﬁrst encode the observation
o
t
iand the action at
iindependently. As discussed in Section
III-A1 , the observation ot
ihas variable length. Thus, the same
GAT-based observation encoder introduced in Section III-A1
is used to transform ot
iinto a ﬁxed-size embedding. The action
embedding can be easily obtained through an FC layer. Formally,the observation embedding c
t
iand the action embedding bt
ican
be expressed as follows:
ct
i=OE(ot
i),bt
i=FC(at
i) (18)
where OE (·)denotes the observation encoder deﬁned in
Section III-A1 . The outputs of the observation encoder and the
action encoder are then concatenated and passed through an FC
layer to obtain the initial feature representation
zt
i=F C (ct
i||bt
i). (19)
This representation zt
iserves as the input node feature in the sub-
sequent GAT, which enables the agent to aggregate contextual
information from its neighbors in the multiagent system.
2) Q-Value Estimation With GAT: When estimating the state-
action value (Q-value) for each agent, it is beneﬁcial to selec-
tively focus on the most relevant information from other agents
rather than treating all agents equally [36]. In light of this, we
utilize a GAT layer to capture the inﬂuence of other agents on
the agent’s Q-value.
Similar to the observation encoder for agent i, the feature
aggregation process is computed based on the importance of all
agents
vt
i=/summationdisplay
j∈I/iβt
ijWrzt
j (20)
where the importance coefﬁcient βt
ijis calculated as
βt
ij=exp(b/latticetopLeakyReLU/parenleftbig
Wlzt
i+Wrzt
j/parenrightbig
)/summationtext
j∈I/iexp(b/latticetopLeakyReLU/parenleftbig
Wlzt
i+Wrzt
j/parenrightbig
)(21)
wherebis a learnable attention vector, WlandWrare learnable
weight matrices, j∈I/imeansj∈I butj/negationslash=i.
This selective aggregation allows the agent to focus on the
most important neighboring agents for estimating its Q-value.
Formally, the aggregated feature vt
iis combined with agent i’s
own feature zt
ito approximate the ﬁnal Q-value through a three-
layer MLP
Qt
i=MLPQ/parenleftbig
zt
i||vt
i/parenrightbig
. (22)
C. Learning Process
In this section, we present the training procedure of the pro-
posed GDMAAC algorithm for solving the distributed ﬂocking
with obstacle avoidance task. Unlike conventional multiagentactor–critic approaches that learn independent policies for eachThis article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
6 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS
agent [33], GDMAAC adopts the parameter sharing mecha-
nism [37] to exploit the homogeneity among agents, thereby
improving scalability and sample efﬁciency. As a result, onlyone shared diffusion-based actor and one centralized GAT-based
critic are trained for all agents.
To train the actor and critic networks, we maintain a shared
replay buffer D, which stores the experiences collected from
all agents. At each training iteration, a minibatch of transitions
is randomly sampled from Dto update the networks. The
GAT-based critic network is updated by minimizing the temporal
difference loss [30],[33]
L(θ
Q
l)=E(ot,at,rt,ot+1)∼D/bracketleftbigg1
nn/summationdisplay
i=1/parenleftbig
Ql(ot,at)−yt
i/parenrightbig2/bracketrightbigg
(23)
whereθQ
l=1,2denotes the parameters of the critic network; yt
iis
the target Q-value; ot=(ot
1,...,ot
n),at=(at
1,...,at
n), and
rt=(rt
1,...,rt
n)represents the joint observations, actions, and
rewards for all agents at timestep t, respectively.
To mitigate overestimation bias in computing the target Q-
value, we incorporate the double Q-learning technique [38].
Speciﬁcally, two independent critic networks Q1andQ2are
trained, and the minimum of them is used to calculate the targetQ-value
y
t
i=rt
i+γmin
l=1,2Q−
l(ot+1,˜at+1
1,..., ˜at+1
n) (24)
whereQ−
ldenotes the target critic network, γ∈[0,1)is the
discounted factor, and ˜at+1
iindicates the action generated from
the target actor network with smoothing noise [38]
˜at+1
i=π−(ot+1
i)+/epsilon1a,/epsilon1a∼clip/parenleftbig
N(0,σ2
a),−c,c/parenrightbig
(25)
whereπ−denotes the target actor network, σ2
aindicates the
variance of Gaussian noise /epsilon1a, and clip (·,−c,c)represents the
clip operation, which limits values to the range [−c,c].
The diffusion-based policy network is optimized to maximize
the expected Q-value, with gradients computed via backpropa-
gation through the reverse denoising steps
∇θπJ(θπ)=E(ot,at,rt,ot+1)∼D/bracketleftbigg1
nn/summationdisplay
i=1(∇θππ/parenleftbig
ot
i/parenrightbig
×∇at
iQ1(ot,at
1,...,atn)|at
i=π(ot
i)/bracketrightbigg
.(26)
To stabilize the learning process, we employ the target actor
networkπ−and target critic networks Q−
l=1,2in GDMAAC.
Their parameters θπ−andθQ−
l=1,2are updated as follows:
θπ−←τθπ+(1−τ)θπ−
θQ−
l←τθQ
l+(1−τ)θQ−
l(27)
whereτ/lessmuch1 is the soft update rate.
The complete learning pipeline of the proposed GDMAAC
algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.Algorithm 1: GDMAAC.
Input: Maximum training episodes M, maximum timestep
per episode Ns, update frequency C, target update rate τ,
replay buffer maximum capacity N, batch size Nb, noise
parameters σ2
a,c
1: Initialize diffusion-based actor with parameters θμand
and two graph-based critics with parameters θQ
l=1,2
randomly
2: Initialize target networks: θπ−←θπ;θQ−
l=1,2←θQ
l=1,2
3: Initialize replay buffer Dwith maximum capacity N
4:forepisode =1t oMdo
5: Receive initial observations o1
6: fort=1t oNsdo
7: Generate action at
ifor each agent with reverse
denoising process
8: Execute joint actions at=(at
1,...,at
n), compute
immediate reward rt
i, and receive new observations
ot+1
9: Store transition (ot,at,rt,ot+1)inD, delete the
oldest transition if /bardblD/bardbl>N
10:ot←ot+1
11: Sample a minibatch of Nbtuples from D
12: Update θQ
l=1,2by minimizing L(θQ
l)in(23)
13: iftmodCthen
14: Update θπvia gradient in (26)
15: Update θπ−andθQ−
l=1,2with (27)
16: end if
17: end for
18:end for
IV. S IMULATION AND EXPERIMENT
This section validates the proposed approach in numerical
simulations and HITL experiments.
A. Implementation Details
We now detail the parameter settings of the proposed
GDMAAC algorithm. For the diffusion-based policy network,
the four FC layers in (9)for embedding all contained 64 neurons.
When computing the attention weight in (11),Wnei∈R64×64,
Wego∈R64×64,a∈R64×1. The MLP in the noise prediction
network (16) contained three FC hidden layers, each of which
had 256 neurons. For the graph-based value network, the FC
layers in (18) and (19) had 64 and 256 neurons, respectively.
In(21),Wl∈R256×256,Wr∈R256×256, andb∈R256×1.T h e
two hidden layers of the three-layer MLP in (22) for estimating
the Q-value both had 256 neurons, but the output layers had
one neuron activated by the linear functions. All other FC layerswere followed by the Mish activation function [39].
In the diffusion-based policy network, the reverse step was
set toK=5. The predetermined variance factor β
k=1−
e−βmin
K−2k−1
2K2(βmax−βmin)was controlled by the variational pos-
terior scheduler [26], whereβminandβmax were set to 0.1 and
10, respectively. The output of the diffusion-based policy wasclipped into the interval [−1,1]. We used the Adam optimizerThis article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
YAN et al.: GDM ENHANCED MADRL FOR DISTRIBUTED FLOCKING WITH OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE OF FIXED-WING AAV SWARMS 7
TABLE I
PARAMETER SETTINGS
to update all network parameters of GDMAAC. The learning
rates for updating the policy and the value network were set to
0.0001 and 0.0005, respectively [33]. The maximum training
episode was set to M=10 000. In general, the parameter
settings were set with reference to empirical tests and previous
works [24],[26],[33]. The empirical values of other parameters
in GDMAAC are presented in Table I.
B. Numerical Simulation Results
1) Training Results: We ﬁrst compared our algorithm with
several existing state-of-the-art baselines, i.e., MADDPG [33],
AMADDPG, ARMADDPG, HRAMAAC, and HRAMATD3.
To enable scalability of the learned ﬂocking policies to different
AA V swarm sizes, the ﬁve baseline algorithms also adopted the
parameter sharing mechanism [37] as in GDMAAC, and utilized
the self-attention mechanism [40] as the observation encoder
following [30]. The ﬁve baselines also adopted the parameter
sharing mechanism [37], consistent with GDMAAC, and uti-
lized self-attention [40] as the observation encoder, following
the approach in [30]. In addition, AMADDPG applied the self-
attention mechanism in the critic to selectively aggregate infor-mation from other agents [36]. ARMADDPG further introduced
the recurrent actor-critic framework, such as RMADDPG [41].
Compared with ARMADDPG, HRAMAAC incorporated thegroup-level attention mechanism consistent with [24].O nt h i s
basis, HRAMATD3 further enhanced the learning process with
the MATD3 algorithm [42].
We trained the ﬁve baseline algorithms and our GDMAAC
algorithm independently to acquire ﬂocking policies. In the
training scenario, ten follower AA Vs navigated alongside a
leader within a rectangular area measuring 1200 m ×200 m.
The scenario included twenty randomly placed obstacles, ei-ther convex polygons or circles. For each training episode, the
obstacle conﬁgurations and the leader’s planned trajectory were
randomly generated. The radius of the obstacles were randomlygenerated from the predeﬁned set {10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35,
40} (m). This conﬁguration ensures that obstacles are large
enough to be detected by the AA V’s distance sensor.
Fig. 3presents the average rewards obtained by the follow-
ers with the ﬁve baselines and our GDMAAC algorithm. As
observed, all learning curves exhibit a steep increase duringthe early training phase. After approximately 4000 episodes,
Fig. 3. Learning curves of MADDPG, AMADDPG, ARMADDPG, HRA-
MAAC, HRAMATD3, and GMMAAC. Note that the reward values are
averaged every 25 episodes.
all of them begin to stabilize and reach convergence (about 3.5 h
of wall-clock time with NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090D GPU).Although the learning efﬁciency is similar, the ﬁnal convergence
values vary signiﬁcantly among the algorithms. The ﬁnal re-
wards of AMADDPG and ARMADDPG are higher than thatof MADDPG. The explanation for performance improvement
is that selecting relevant information from other agents and
encoding historical information are very useful. Compared withARMADDPG, HRAMAAC and HRAMATD3 achieve a higher
average reward. This means that it is more effective to use
group-level attention to discriminatively aggregate embeddingsof different groups than to concatenate them directly. In addition,
GDMAAC achieves a higher average reward compared to HRA-
MAAC and HRAMATD3. The above-mentioned results demon-
strate that the proposed GDMAAC algorithm outperforms all
ﬁve existing baselines.
2) Testing Results: After the training phase, we tested the
ﬂocking control with obstacle avoidance policy acquired by the
proposed GDMAAC algorithm in a representative task scenario.Thirty-six convex polygonal and circular obstacles were evenly
distributed across the rectangular mission area. The leader
followed a predeﬁned path without considering environmen-tal obstacles, aiming to evaluate whether the followers would
collide with the obstacles as the leader passed through them.
Meanwhile, ten follower AA Vs executed the learned GDMAAC
policy to track the leader over 180 timesteps.
The trajectories and performance of the followers are depicted
in Figs. 4and5, respectively. The followers can keep up with
the leader and keep away from the surrounding obstacles at the
same time, whether the leader ﬂies in a straight line or in violentmotion. More precisely, the distances between the leader and
the followers ( ρ) are predominantly maintained within the range
of 50–150 meters during the evaluation. Furthermore, both theminimum interfollower distance ( D
nei
min) and the minimum dis-
tance between the followers and surrounding obstacles ( Doba
min)
consistently exceed the follower safety threshold Rs=5mat
all timesteps. These results indicate that no collisions occurThis article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS
Fig. 4. Trajectories of ten followers employing the learned GDMAAC policy in a typical obstacle-cluttered environment.
Fig. 5. Performance of the learned GDMAAC policy. (a) Distances
from the leader to the followers. (b) Minimum interfollower distance.
(c) Minimum distance between followers and surrounding obstacles.
among followers or between any follower and environmental
obstacles throughout the entire testing process. In addition,
we also conducted two testing experiments with ﬁve and 20
followers under the same environmental settings. Because of
the limitation of length, the testing results are available in the
supplemental movie at.1
3) Generalization Results: To evaluate the generalization
and scalability of the learned ﬂocking control with obstacle
1[Online]. Available: https://youtu.be/OfCYR3KYc2Qavoidance policies, we directly applied it to AA V swarms com-
prising varying numbers of follower agents. Speciﬁcally, gener-
alization evaluations were conducted with swarm sizes of ten, 15,
and 20 followers. Each evaluation consisted of 20 episodes, with
each episode running for 60 timesteps. We deﬁned the following
metrics to evaluate the policy performance: the average reward
of each follower at each timestep G, the average collision rate F,
and the average distance between the leader and the followers
¯ρ.
Table IIreports the zero-shot generalization results on the
AA V swarms with different numbers of followers. It is not sur-
prising that MADDPG achieves the worst performance across
three scenarios. Compared with MADDPG, AMADDPG and
ARMADDPG perform better in terms of the three metrics.
We note that HRAMAAC and HRAMATD3 achieve better and
similar performance. Although the collision rate of HRAMAAC
is lower than that of HRAMATD3, HRAMATD3 performs
better in terms of the average distance to the leader and the
average reward. In contrast, our proposed GDMAAC algorithm
signiﬁcantly outperforms all baselines in terms of average re-
ward and collision rate. More importantly, GDMAAC shows
a signiﬁcant advantage in reducing collision rate. Speciﬁcally,
GDMAAC reduces the collision rate from 1.85% to 1.42% at
n=10, representing a relative reduction of 23.24% . Similarly,
atn=20, the collision rate decreases from 2.38% to 1.72% ,
corresponding to a 27.73% reduction. These results indicate that
GDMAAC produces safer and more reliable policies, especially
in dense swarm scenarios.
It is worth noting that the generalization simulations were
conducted using the same trained GDMAAC model, without any
retraining for different swarm sizes. This scalability stems from
the parameter sharing mechanism, which enables the learned
policy to generalize directly to swarms of arbitrary sizes, and
from the GAT, which allows the policy and value networksThis article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
YAN et al.: GDM ENHANCED MADRL FOR DISTRIBUTED FLOCKING WITH OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE OF FIXED-WING AAV SWARMS 9
TABLE II
GENERALIZATION RESULTS OF THE LEARNED FLOCKING POLICIES ON THE AAV S WARMS WITHDIFFERENT NUMBERS OF FOLLOWERS
Fig. 6. Bar charts of ablation results of the proposed algorithms for
ﬂocking control with different numbers of followers. (a) Average reward.
(b) Collision rate. (c) Average distance.
to process information from a variable number of neighbors.
Overall, we can conclude from Table IIthat regardless of the size
of AA V ﬂeets, the proposed GDMAAC algorithm outperforms
the four baselines and achieves the best tradeoff between theaverage reward Fand the average distance ¯ρ.
4) Ablation Studies: To validate the effectiveness of each key
component in the proposed GDMAAC algorithm, we conductedablation studies by systematically removing the GDM and the
GAT from the policy and value networks, respectively. Specif-
ically, we designed the following two ablation variants. 1) w/o
GDM: The diffusion-based policy network is replaced with a
deterministic policy network as in the standard MADDPG algo-rithm. 2) w/o GAT: The graph attention mechanism is removed
from the Q-value estimator. Instead, a simple concatenation
operation is adopted for feature aggregation. The simulationsettings of the ablation studies were the same as in Section IV-B3 .
Fig. 6illustrates the performance of the ablation variants
across different swarm sizes. As shown, removing the GAT mod-ule (w/o GAT) results in signiﬁcant performance degradation.
For example, when n=15, the average reward Gdecreases
from−332.76 to −475.42, corresponding to a relative drop
of 42.81% . Meanwhile, the collision rate Fincreases from1.45% to 2.73% , reﬂecting an 88.28% rise. These results
highlight the critical role of the graph-based value network
in effectively capturing inter-agent interactions and enhancingpolicy evaluation accuracy. On the other hand, removing the
GDM module (w/o GDM) also leads to noticeable performance
deterioration, though its impact is less severe compared to theremoval of GAT. For instance, when n=20, the average reward
Gdeclines from −421.75 to −436.46, and the collision rate
increases from 1.72% to 1.88% , indicating a relative rewarddecrease of 3.49% and a collision rate increase of 9.30% . This
conﬁrms that GDM contributes to improving policy diversity
and robustness. Overall, GDMAAC consistently achieves thebest performance across all metrics and scenarios. The ablation
studies demonstrate that both the diffusion-based policy and
the graph-based value network are indispensable components,jointly contributing to superior ﬂocking stability, lower collision
rates, and better scalability of the proposed approach.
C. HITL Experiment Results
To validate the practicability of the proposed approach for
ﬂocking control with obstacle avoidance, we built a high-ﬁdelityHITL experiment system [30],[43]. As illustrated in Fig. 7,t h e
X-Plane ten ﬂight simulator provided a realistic virtual envi-
ronment for testing the control and coordination of ﬁxed-wingAA Vs. Each onboard Jetson TX2 computer, running Ubuntu
18.04 LTS and robot operating system, was responsible for
executing the learned policy and generating high-level controlcommands in real time. These commands were transmitted to
the PX4/Pixhawk autopilot for low-level ﬂight control. The
ground control station was used for monitoring and centralized
management of the entire AA V swarm.
In the HITL experiment, four follower AA Vs deployed the
ﬂocking policy learned from numerical simulations without any
parameter tuning to follow a predeﬁned leader. The task area
contained nine circular obstacles of varying radii, as illustratedin Fig. 8. The leader’s trajectory was preplanned based on
the positions of the destination and surrounding obstacles. The
entire evaluation was conducted over a duration of 180 timesteps(i.e., seconds). Fig. 8presents the trajectories of the leader and
the four followers in this HITL experiment. The four followers
can autonomously keep up with the leader while successfullyavoiding environmental obstacles, even in a narrow corridorThis article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
10 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS
Fig. 7. High-ﬁdelity HITL experiment system for ﬂocking control with
ﬁxed-wing AAV swarms.
Fig. 8. Trajectories of four followers and the leader in the HITL experi-
ment. (a) t=0∼110s.( b ) t=110∼130s.( c ) t=130∼180s.
with dense obstacles [see Fig. 8(b)-II]. A video about this HITL
experiment is available at.2
The performance metrics of the learned GDMAAC ﬂocking
policy in this HITL experiment were also recorded. As illustrated
in Fig. 9(a), the distances between the leader and the followers
(ρ) remain within the range of 5–200 m, indicating stable leader–
following behavior and effective avoidance of collisions with
the leader. More importantly, as shown in Fig. 9(b) and(c), both
the minimum interfollower distance ( Dnei
min) and the minimum
distance between followers and nearby obstacles ( Dobs
min) consis-
tently exceeded the predeﬁned safety threshold Rs=5m. These
results conﬁrm that the learned GDMAAC policy enables each
follower to successfully avoid collisions with both teammates
and environmental obstacles while maintaining a ﬂock.
2[Online]. Available: https://youtu.be/OfCYR3KYc2QFig. 9. Performance of the learned GDMAAC policy in the HITL exper-
iment. (a) Distances to the leader. (b) Minimum interfollower distance.
(c) Minimum distance between the followers and surrounding obstacles.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we propose the GDMAAC algorithm to address
the distributed ﬂocking control and obstacle avoidance problem
for scalable ﬁxed-wing AA V swarms. By integrating a GDM into
the policy network, GDMAAC enhances agents’ ability to gen-
erate diverse and multimodal actions. In addition, a GAT-based
centralized value network is introduced to improve the accuracy
of Q-value estimation by extracting relevant interagent features.
These designs enable each AA V to explore multiple feasible
maneuver strategies for ﬂocking and obstacle avoidance, en-
hancing the robustness and ﬂexibility of swarm coordination.
Numerical simulations and HITL experiments demonstrate that
GDMAAC signiﬁcantly outperforms existing baselines in terms
of ﬂocking stability and collision avoidance, while maintaining
strong generalization to varying swarm sizes. In future work,
we plan to extend the GDMAAC framework to tackle more
challenging scenarios, such as 3-D dynamic environments and
heterogeneous AA V swarms.
REFERENCES
[1] Y . Wang, Y . Yue, M. Shan, L. He, and D. Wang, “Formation reconstruc-
tion and trajectory replanning for multi-UA V patrol,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatron. , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 719–729, Apr. 2021.
[2] X. Zhang, H. Zhao, J. Wei, C. Yan, J. Xiong, and X. Liu, “Coopera-
tive trajectory design of multiple UA V base stations with heterogeneous
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 22, no. 3,
pp. 1495–1509, Mar. 2023.
[3] L. Zewde and I. A. Raptis, “Conceptualizing UAM: Technologies and
methods for safe and efﬁcient urban air transportation,” Green Energy
Intell. Transp. , vol. 5, no. 1, 2026, Art. no. 100265.
[4] M. Zhang, C. Yan, W. Dai, X. Xiang, and K. H. Low, “Tactical conﬂict
resolution in urban airspace for unmanned aerial vehicles operations
using attention-based deep reinforcement learning,” Green Energy Intell.
Transp. , vol. 2, no. 4, 2023, Art. no. 100107.
[5] S. Deniz, Y . Wu, Y . Shi, and Z. Wang, “A reinforcement learning approach
to vehicle coordination for structured advanced air mobility,” Green Energy
Intell. Transp. , vol. 3, no. 2, 2024, Art. no. 100157.This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
YAN et al.: GDM ENHANCED MADRL FOR DISTRIBUTED FLOCKING WITH OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE OF FIXED-WING AAV SWARMS 11
[6] Y . Deng, B. Zhu, and H. Duan, “Bioinspired bearing–based target
enclosing control for unmanned aerial vehicle swarm,” IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatron. , vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 2699–2709, Aug. 2025,
doi: 10.1109/TMECH.2024.3457826 .
[7] P.-X. Wu, C.-C. Yang, and T.-H. Cheng, “Cooperative transportation of
UA Vs without inter-UA V communication,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mecha-
tron. , vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 2340–2351, Aug. 2023.
[8] S. Dey and H. Xu, “Distributed adaptive ﬂocking control for large-scale
multiagent systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. , vol. 36, no. 2,
pp. 3126–3135, Feb. 2025.
[9] G. Zhu, Q. Zhang, B. Zhu, and T. Hu, “Heuristic predictive control
for multirobot ﬂocking in congested environments,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatron. , vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 1435–1446, Apr. 2025.
[10] F. Wang, J. Huang, K. H. Low, and T. Hu, “Collective navigation of aerial
vehicle swarms: A ﬂocking inspired approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh. ,
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1040–1053, Jan. 2024.
[11] C. Li et al., “Flocking navigation and obstacle avoidance for UA V swarms
via adaptive risk avoidance willingness mechanism,” IET Cyber- Syst.
Robot. , vol. 7, no. 1, 2025, Art. no. e70009.
[12] S. Shao, J. Zhang, T. Wang, A. Shankar, and C. Maple, “Dynamic
obstacle-avoidance algorithm for multi-robot ﬂocking based on improved
artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. , vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 4388–4399, Feb. 2024.
[13] T. T. Nguyen, N. D. Nguyen, and S. Nahavandi, “Deep reinforcement
learning for multiagent systems: A review of challenges, solutions, and ap-
plications,” IEEE Trans. Cybern. , vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 3826–3839, Sep. 2020.
[14] W. Du and S. Ding, “A survey on multi-agent deep reinforcement learning:
From the perspective of challenges and applications,” Artif. Intell. Rev. ,
vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 3215–3238, 2021.
[15] J. Kober, J. A. Bagnell, and J. Peters, “Reinforcement learning in robotics:
A survey,” Int. J. Robot. Res. , vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1238–1274, 2013.
[16] J. Shi et al., “Multi-UA Vs ﬂocking for navigation and obstacle avoidance
in network-constrained environments,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 12,
no. 7, pp. 8931–8946, Apr. 2025.
[17] J. Xiao, C. Huang, G. Yuan, Y . Wang, H. Jia, and Z. Wang, “A model learn-
ing based multiagent ﬂocking collaborative control method for stochastic
communication environment,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat. , vol. 20, no. 6,
pp. 8896–8906, Jun. 2024.
[18] Y . Jia et al., “A deep reinforcement learning approach using asymmetric
self-play for robust multirobot ﬂocking,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat. ,
vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3266–3275, Apr. 2025.
[19] S.-M. Hung and S. N. Givigi, “A Q-learning approach to ﬂocking with
UA Vs in a stochastic environment,” IEEE Trans. Cybern. , vol. 47, no. 1,
pp. 186–197, Jan. 2017.
[20] Y . Song et al., “Distributed swarm system with hybrid-ﬂocking control for
small ﬁxed-wing UA Vs: Algorithms and ﬂight experiments,” Expert Syst.
with Appl. , vol. 229, 2023, Art. no. 120457.
[21] H. Li, Z. Sun, H. Chen, X. Wang, and L. Shen, “Bearing-based simulta-
neous localization and afﬁne formation tracking for ﬁxed-wing unmannedaerial vehicles,” Aerosp. Sci. Technol. , vol. 157, 2025, Art. no. 109840.
[22] B. Ma et al., “Reinforcement learning based UA V formation con-
trol in GPS-denied environment,” Chin. J. Aeronaut. , vol. 36, no. 11,
pp. 281–296, 2023.
[23] X. Zhuang, D. Li, Y . Wang, X. Liu, and H. Li, “Optimization of high-
speed ﬁxed-wing UA V penetration strategy based on deep reinforcement
learning,” Aerosp. Sci. Technol. , vol. 148, 2024, Art. no. 109089.
[24] C. Yan et al., “Collision-avoiding ﬂocking with multiple ﬁxed-wing
UA Vs in obstacle-cluttered environments: A task-speciﬁc curriculum-based MADRL approach,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. , vol. 35,
no. 8, pp. 10894–10908, Aug. 2024.
[25] C. Yan, C. Wang, H. Zhou, X. Xiang, X. Wang, and L. Shen, “Multi-agent
reinforcement learning with spatial–temporal attention for ﬂocking with
collision avoidance of a scalable ﬁxed-wing UA V ﬂeet,”
IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst. , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 1769–1782, Feb. 2025.
[26] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
inProc. Adv. Neural Informat. Process. Syst. , 2020, pp. 6840–6851.
[27] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion implicit models,”
inProc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations , 2021.
[28] L. Yang et al., “Policy representation via diffusion probability model for
reinforcement learning,” 2023, arXiv:2305.13122 .
[29] M. Psenka, A. Escontrela, P. Abbeel, and Y . Ma, “Learning a diffusion
model policy from rewards via Q-score matching,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. , 2024, pp. 41163–41182.
[30] C. Yan et al., “PASCAL: Population-speciﬁc curriculum-based MADRL
for collision-free ﬂocking with large-scale ﬁxed-wing UA V swarms,”
Aerosp. Sci. Technol. , vol. 133, 2023, Art. no. 108091.[31] C. Yan, X. Xiang, and C. Wang, “Fixed-wing UA Vs ﬂocking in continuous
spaces: A deep reinforcement learning approach,” Robot. Auton. Syst. ,
vol. 131, 2020, Art. no. 103594.
[32] S. Brody, U. Alon, and E. Yahav, “How attentive are graph attention
networks?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations , 2022.
[33] R. Lowe, Y . Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch, “Multi-
agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , 2017, pp. 6382–6393.
[34] H. Du et al., “Diffusion-based reinforcement learning for edge-enabled
AI-generated content services,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. , vol. 23,
no. 9, pp. 8902–8918, Sep. 2024.
[35] X. Tang et al., “Task assignment and exploration optimization for low
altitude UA V rescue via generative AI enhanced multi-agent reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. , vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 627–643,
Jan. 2026, doi: 10.1109/TMC.2025.3594188 .
[36] S. Iqbal and F. Sha, “Actor-attention-critic for multi-agent reinforcement
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , 2019, pp. 2961–2970.
[37] J. K. Gupta, M. Egorov, and M. Kochenderfer, “Cooperative multi-agent
control using deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Auton.
Agents Multiagent Syst. , 2017, pp. 66–83.
[38] S. Fujimoto, H. Hoof, and D. Meger, “Addressing function approximation
error in actor-critic methods,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , 2018,
pp. 1587–1596.
[39] D. Misra, “Mish: A self regularized non-monotonic activation function,”
inProc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf. , 2020.
[40] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. , 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[41] R. E. Wang, M. Everett, and J. P. How, “R-MADDPG for partially observ-
able environments and limited communication,” 2020, arXiv:2002.06684 .
[42] X. Xing, Z. Zhou, Y . Li, B. Xiao, and Y . Xun, “Multi-UA V adaptive
cooperative formation trajectory planning based on an improved MATD3algorithm of deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. ,
vol. 73, no. 9, pp. 12484–12 499, Sep. 2024.
[43] C. Yan, C. Wang, X. Xiang, Z. Lan, and Y . Jiang, “Deep reinforcement
learning of collision-free ﬂocking policies for multiple ﬁxed-wing UA Vsusing local situation maps,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat. , vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 1260–1270, Feb. 2022.
Chao Yan (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
degree in electrical engineering and automa-tion from the China University of Mining and
Technology, Xuzhou, China, in 2017, and the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in control science andengineering from the National University of De-
fense Technology, Changsha, China, in 2019
and 2023, respectively.
From 2021 to 2022, he was a Visiting Ph.D.
Student with the School of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technologi-
cal University, Singapore. He is currently an Associate Professor with theCollege of Automation Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronauticsand Astronautics, Nanjing, China. His research interests include deep
reinforcement learning and cooperative control of AAV swarms.
Yuna Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
degree in information engineering from theChina University of Mining and Technology,Xuzhou, China, in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree
in information and communication engineering
from the Huazhong University of Science andTechnology, Wuhan, China, in 2023.
From 2021 to 2022, she was a Visiting
Ph.D. Student with the School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Nanyang Techno-logical University, Singapore. She is currently
an Associate Professor with the School of Communications and In-
formation Engineering, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommu-
nications, Nanjing, China. Her research interests include multime-dia communication, wireless resource allocation, game theory, andmetaverse.This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
12 IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS
Mou Chen (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
degree in material science and engineering and
the Ph.D. degree in automatic control engineer-
ing from the Nanjing University of Aeronauticsand Astronautics (NUAA), Nanjing, China, in1998 and 2004, respectively.
From 2007 to 2008, he was an Academic
Visitor with the Department of Aeronautical andAutomotive Engineering, Loughborough Univer-
sity, Loughborough, U.K. From 2008 to 2009, he
was a Research Fellow with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore,Singapore. From May to November 2014, he was a Senior Academic
Visitor with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia. He is currently a Pro-fessor with the College of Automation Engineering, NUAA. His researchinterests include nonlinear system control, intelligent control, and ﬂight
control.
Xiaojia Xiang received the B.E., M.S., and
Ph.D. degrees in automatic control from theNational University of Defense Technology
(NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2003, 2007, and
2016, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the College of
Intelligence Science and Technology, NUDT. His
research interest include mission planning, and
cooperative control of autonomous systems.
Xiangke Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) re-
ceived the B.E., M.E., and Ph.D. degrees in con-
trol science and engineering from the National
University of Defense Technology (NUDT),Changsha, China, in 2004, 2006, and 2012,respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the College
of Intelligence Science and Technology, NUDT.He has authored or coauthored three books and
more than 100 publications in peer-reviewed
journals and international conferences. His re-
search interests include the control of multiagent systems and theirapplications on autonomous aerial vehicles.This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on July 03,2026 at 03:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
