SPAR: Scalable LLM-based PDDL Domain Generation
for Aerial Robotics
Songhao Huang∗1, Yuwei Wu∗1, Guangyao Shi2, Gaurav S. Sukhatme2, Vijay Kumar1
Abstract—We investigate the problem of automatic do-
main generation for the Planning Domain Definition Lan-
guage (PDDL) using Large Language Models (LLMs), with
a particular focus on unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) tasks.
Although PDDL is a widely adopted standard in robotic Fig.1. TheSPARframeworkfordomaingenerationandplanning.
planning, manually designing domains for diverse applications
generatingdomainfilesremainssubstantiallymorechalleng-
such as surveillance, delivery, and inspection is labor-intensive
and error-prone, which hinders adoption and real-world de- ing.Unlikeproblemfiles,domainfilesdefinereusableaction
ployment. To address these challenges, we propose SPAR, a schemas that model the structure, dynamics, and constraints
frameworkthatleveragesthegenerativecapabilitiesofLLMsto ofaplanningenvironment,requiringabstraction,consistency,
automaticallyproducevalid,diverse,andsemanticallyaccurate
and logical reasoning. Consequently, automating domain
PDDL domains from natural language input. To this end, we
generation and transfer has attracted increasing research
first introduce a systematically formulated and validated UAV
planning dataset, consisting of ground-truth PDDL domains attention [7]–[11]. Nevertheless, these reasoning capabilities
and associated problems, each paired with detailed domain remain difficult for LLMs to reliably demonstrate.
and action descriptions. Building on this dataset, we design
Moreover, the success of LLM-based domain generation
a prompting framework that generates high-quality PDDL
is highly sensitive to the amount and quality of information
domainsfromlanguageinput.Thegenerateddomainsareeval-
uated through syntax validation, executability, feasibility, and provided. Existing studies often assume access to detailed
interpretability.Overall,thisworkdemonstratesthatLLMscan task descriptions, expert knowledge, or ground-truth domain
substantially accelerate the creation of complex planning do- models [12, 13]. While such conditions yield promising re-
mains,providingareproducibledatasetandevaluationpipeline
sults,theydonotreflectrealisticscenarioswherenon-experts
that enables application experts without prior experience to
provide ambiguous or incomplete descriptions of unfamiliar
leverage it for practical tasks and advance future research in
aerial robotics and automated planning. tasks, or they don’t have access to real-world environments.
In these cases, LLM-generated domain files frequently ex-
I. INTRODUCTION hibit syntactic and semantic errors, logical inconsistencies,
and incomplete action definitions. This discrepancy raises
The Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) [1]
a critical question: How can we empower LLMs to au-
is a fundamental formalism in automated planning, widely
tomatically construct reliable PDDL domain definitions
used in diverse areas such as robot task planning, logistics,
for novel tasks, even when faced with unfamiliar actions
and human-robot interactions [2]–[4]. Despite its expressive
and limited prior knowledge?
power, creating correct PDDL domain and problem files is
To address these challenges, we study UAV planning
oftentime-consumingandrequiressignificantexpertise,even
as a representative and demanding domain involving com-
for experienced users, which limits its broader adoption in
plex tasks with diverse constraints. To enable a systematic
planning systems for real-world applications, particularly in
evaluation of LLMs in generating diverse and previously
dynamic and safety-critical domains like Unmanned Aerial
unseen planning domains, our first step involves the follow-
Vehicle (UAV) operations. These domains involve complex
ing procedures: (1) define a domain complexity metric that
three-dimensionalenvironments,GPS-deniedconditions,ex-
quantifies difficulty across planning domains; (2) create a
ternal disturbances, and limited observations, making speci-
new PDDL domain evaluation dataset, which covers hand-
fication technically non-trivial.
craftedandLLM-generateddomainsfromdiversesourcesto
RecentadvancesinLargeLanguageModels(LLMs)offer
ensure novelty relative to LLM training data. This dataset
promisingopportunitiestoautomatethegenerationofPDDL
includes a wide range of UAV scenarios (e.g., navigation,
from natural language descriptions. Prior work has demon-
inspection, delivery) and diverse actions (e.g., detection,
stratednotablesuccessingeneratingPDDLproblemfiles[5,
loading, recharging); and (3) defines a set of evaluation
6], which specify concrete initial states and goals. However,
metricsforassessingbothsyntacticandsemanticcorrectness.
Building on this foundation, we introduce SPAR (Fig. 1),
∗Equalcontribution.1SonghaoHuang,YuweiWu,andVijayKumarare
a generation framework designed to address two common
withtheGRASPLab,UniversityofPennsylvania,Philadelphia,PA19104,
USA.Email:{songhaoh, yuweiwu, kumar}@seas.upenn.edu. issues in LLM-generated domains: syntax errors and se-
2 Guangyao Shi and Gaurav S. Sukhatme are with the Department of mantic errors. To mitigate syntax errors, the framework
Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
adopts an action-by-action generation process with a func-
90089,USA.Email:{shig, gaurav}@usc.edu.
WealsothankJonathanDillerforprovidinghelpfulcomments. tional syntax checker in a feedback loop for iterative cor-
5202
peS
71
]OR.sc[
1v19631.9052:viXra
rection. To mitigate semantic errors, it incorporates chain- B. Planning Domain Generation
of-thought (CoT) reasoning to guide step-by-step action
Generating planning domains with LLMs requires strong
generation. Furthermore, inspired by retrieval-augmented
reasoningcapabilities.Priorworkhasexploredseveralstrate-
generation (RAG) [14], the framework retrieves the most
gies to improve the quality of LLM-generated PDDL. Guan
relevant examples from a curated dataset to support in-
et al. [22] employed in-context learning with curated exam-
context reasoning. Our main contributions are as follows:
plestoimprovesyntacticcorrectness,whileZhangetal.[13]
• Wepresentafirst multi-domainPDDLdatasetforUAV introduced Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD) prompt-
applications, consisting of 30 domain-problem pairs ing to enhance reasoning and support open-domain genera-
with aligned natural language descriptions. The dataset tion. Mahdavi et al. [12] further proposed an environment-
includes both logical and numeric domains designed to feedbacklooptorefinedomainsbasedonsemanticsimilarity.
be unseen for current LLMs. A key challenge in domain generation lies in the quan-
• We propose a domain generation framework that com- tity and quality of input information. Providing additional
bines CoT prompting, relevant-example retrieval, and knowledge, such as predicates [11, 13] or structural descrip-
an action-by-action feedback generation schema to im- tions [12] often improves accuracy, but such inputs are not
prove generation ability. alwaysavailableinreal-worldscenarios[22].Toaddressthis,
• WebenchmarkmultipleLLMsandpromptingstrategies we leverage RAG to retrieve the most relevant examples for
on our dataset across multiple evaluation metrics and in-contextlearningunderlimitedinputconditionstoimprove
validatetheframeworkinUAVsimulationexperiments, semantic fidelity. Feedback mechanisms are also crucial for
demonstrating the practical feasibility for downstream domain quality. Guan et al. [22] proposed a syntax validator
planning and execution. withhuman-in-the-looprefinement,whileSmirnovetal.[23]
and Mahdavi et al. [12] automated feedback through con-
II. RELATEDWORK
sistency checks or environment evaluation. However, these
A. Using LLMs in Task Planning
methods often assume access to the ground-truth (GT) envi-
LLMs have recently been explored in various capacities ronment. Moreover, many validators (e.g., Tarski [24]) lack
to assist with task planning in symbolic domains. support for numeric conditions. Since our dataset includes
a) LLMs as task planners: One line of research at- numeric operators, we extend the validator from Guan et
tempts to use LLMs as task planners to generate valid, al. [22] and incorporate LLM-friendly feedback to improve
executable plans directly from natural language instructions. syntax correctness during action-by-action generation.
However, naively prompting LLMs often leads to issues
C. UAV Task Planning Benchmark
withcorrectnessandcompleteness,especiallyforcomplexor
long-horizontasks[15]–[18].Tomitigatetheseissues,recent Existing UAV task planning benchmarks primarily focus
works propose augmenting LLMs with high-level reasoning, on a single task type or the UAV platform itself, such as
optimization methods, or domain-specific priors to improve inspection with heterogeneous UAVs [25], object detection
reliability [19, 20]. In the context of PDDL-based planning, [26], and goal navigation [27]. With VLA/VLN, more UAV
few-shot prompting has been explored [19], showing that benchmarks have been proposed in both simulation and
careful prompt engineering and example selection can sub- real-world settings [28, 29]. To broaden UAV applications,
stantiallyimprovethequalityandvalidityofgeneratedplans. our dataset encompasses not only standard tasks such as
b) LLMs for problem or goal generation: Since LLMs navigation,detection,coordination,andexploration,butalso
struggle to serve directly as planners with correctness guar- non-standard scenarios, including aerial transportation with
antees, an alternative approach is to use them for generating aerial manipulators, flying cars, and others. In addition, few
PDDL problem specifications from natural language, given works have introduced PDDL-based benchmarks for UAV
a known domain model. These generated problems can then task planning. To bridge this gap, we formulate all task
be solved using traditional structured and symbolic planning planningproblemsinPDDL,extendingthestandardSTRIPS
approaches.Forexample,LLM+P[5]isdesignedtogenerate formalism[30]toincorporatenumericalcases,therebymak-
PDDL problem instances in robotic settings by conditioning ing our dataset more representative of real-world conditions.
onboththedomainfileandnaturallanguageinput.Similarly,
III. PROBLEMFORMULATION
Xie et al. [21] showed that LLMs are capable of converting
A. Preliminaries
high-level natural language goals into structured, machine-
interpretable representations. These efforts illustrate how The PDDL is a standardized language used in artificial
LLMs can serve as problem generators, bridging flexible intelligence and robotics to formally describe planning
language interfaces with robust symbolic planning systems. problems. It separates a problem into two parts: the domain,
However,alloftheabovemethodsassumetheavailability which defines the general rules of the world (such as types
of a predefined symbolic world model, specifically a PDDL of objects, predicates, and actions), and the problem, which
domain. Therefore, PDDL domain generation becomes a specifies a particular scenario with initial conditions and
more foundational challenge, since the accuracy and utility goals. For example, in a UAV surveillance task, the domain
of problem generation and plan synthesis are determined by might define actions such as fly, take-photo, and
the quality of the underlying domain model. return-to-base, along with predicates like (at ?uav
Fig.2. TheSPARDomainGenerationandEvaluationPipeline.
?location) and (photo-taken ?location). specifiedorLLM-generated),aclassicalplannerC solvesthe
Then, a specific problem could describe a UAV starting taskTˆ ={Dˆ,Pˆ},producingaplanPlan⊆Aˆthattransitions
at the base, visiting two waypoints, and taking photos at the system from the initial state to the goal state.
each. Using PDDL, a planner can automatically generate a
IV. APPROACH
sequence of actions to fulfill the task, such as (fly base
waypoint1) → (take-photo waypoint1) → Inthissection,wewillfirstdescribethebenchmarkdataset
(fly waypoint1 waypoint2) → (take-photo wecreatedandthenexplaintheproposeddomaingeneration
waypoint2) → (fly waypoint2 base). Such a and evaluation pipeline as illustrated in Fig. 2.
structured representation makes it easier to design, share,
A. Dataset Generation
and solve planning tasks across different domains.
1) PDDL dataset: We introduce a multi-domain PDDL
B. Problem Statement dataset for UAV applications that consists of 30 domains,
We formally introduce the notation used throughout this each representing a distinct UAV-related planning scenario.
paper. A planning problem T is defined in PDDL as a tuple To reduce the risk of evaluating LLMs on data seen dur-
T = {D,P}, where D denotes the PDDL domain, which ing training, we curate the domains from diverse sources,
specifies the general planning environment, and P denotes including academic literature on UAV planning, practical
the PDDL problem, which grounds a specific planning in- application studies, and modified versions of domains from
stance within that environment. We assume that the problem the International Planning Competition (IPC) [31]. Unlike
P will be available after the domain D is generated. prior datasets that often rely on procedural, step-by-step
The domain D consists of a set of fluents F and a instructional text [13], our domains are designed to cap-
set of actions A. Fluents represent the state variables of ture the underlying structure of UAV environments, ensur-
the environment, typically including both predicates and ing semantic coherence beyond surface-level instructions.
numeric functions. Each action a∈A is defined by a set of In addition, several domains incorporate numeric fluents,
parameters, along with its preconditions Pre(a), which must extending beyond the classical STRIPS to model realistic
hold before the action is executed, and its effects Eff(a), UAV planning problems. Each domain is paired with 9
whichdescribehowtheenvironmentchangesafterexecution. problem instances: 3 simple, 3 medium, and 3 hard. Simple
We denote the natural language description of the domain problems can be solved with 1–2 actions, medium problems
as N , and the natural language description of the ith action involve nearly the full action set, and hard problems require
d
a ∈A by N . We say that N is incomplete if it does not the complete set of actions while introducing additional
i ai ai
explicitly describe all the conditions in Pre(a ) and Eff(a ) complexity, such as multi-robot coordination.
i i
using natural language one-by-one. Additionally, we denote 2) PDDL Domain Complexity Metric: To systematically
thedeclaredparametertypesandrequirementsofthedomain quantify the complexity of a PDDL domain, we introduce a
as Extern. Before generation, LLM does not have access to composite metric that captures both structural and semantic
the GT domain; that is, it has no prior knowledge of the characteristics of the domain. Specifically, the metric incor-
environment’s state or actions. poratesthefollowingninecomponents:1)Numberofactions,
Given a tuple (N ,N ,Extern), where some action de- object types, predicates, and functions; 2) Average number
d A
scriptions N ∈ N may be incomplete, we aim to use of preconditions and effects per action; 3) Interdependency
LLMs to au a t i omatica A lly generate a PDDL domain Dˆ = score: the average number of actions referencing a given
(Fˆ,Aˆ).WithacorrespondingprobleminstancePˆ (manually predicate or function; 4) Action coupling: the number of
conditions in an action’s effects that appear as preconditions original and abstracted forms, retaining key elements like
in other actions. The final complexity score is computed as ‘uav’,‘move’,and‘increase’,whilereplacingotherspecifics
a weighted sum of each component. with placeholders. We encode all abstracted action represen-
Across our dataset, domain complexity scores range tations into embeddings using the all-mpnet-base-v2
from 2.79 to 15.23, capturing a broad spectrum of diffi- model[33],andstoretheminasearchableembeddingindex.
culty—from simple navigation tasks to multi-agent coor- The retrieval process consists of two stages. In the coarse
dination and numeric reasoning challenges. This diversity stage, we abstract the target action description N and
ai
enables robust evaluation of LLMs across varying lev- embed it as a query (Eg. 1); cosine similarities are com-
els of domain complexity. For reference, the well-known puted across the stored index, and the top-K most relevant
BLOCKSWORLD [32] domain (complexity: 5.23) ranks examples are retrieved. In the fine stage, these top-K can-
17thoutof30,frommosttoleastcomplex.Basedonthis,we didates are fed into LLMs to re-order and select the most
divide the dataset into 14 simple (≤ 5.23) and 16 complex semantically relevant example for in-context learning.
(> 5.23) domains-a split used throughout our evaluation.
2) Prompt with Chain of Thought: To improve
the reasoning capability of LLMs in PDDL domain
B. Generate PDDL domain with LLMs
generation, we employ a CoT prompting that directs the
We adopt an action-by-action strategy to generate each
model to explicitly decompose the problem. The CoT
action within a domain. For action aˆ, given the input tuple
i process is embedded within context examples across
(N d ,N ai ,Extern), we employ a coarse-to-fine approach to three progressive reasoning steps. First, we ask What
retrieve the most relevant example from our dataset for in- are the objects?, prompting LLM to infer which
context learning. We then construct a prompt using a chain-
objects are involved in the action based on the given
of-thought method and feed it into LLM. The resulting
context. This helps the model determine the correct action
PDDL action is validated by a syntax checker, which pro- parameters. Second, we ask For each object, what
vides feedback if syntax errors are detected. This process is are the preconditions? State them using
repeated by re-prompting LLMs with feedback until either predicates or functions. This encourages the
a syntactically correct output is generated or a maximum
model to reason about the conditions for action execution
iteration number is reached.
from the perspective of each object. Precondition can be
either newly created or retrieved from an existing fluent
Example 1: Action Description Abstraction
list, and is paired with a natural language explanation
OriginalActionDescription to reinforce understanding. Third, we ask For each
This action enables a uav to move from its current object, what are the effects? State them
position to a new position if two positions are using predicates or functions. which mirrors
connected. This costs one unit of energy. For example,
the uav moves from position_1 to position_2 if there the second question but focuses on the state changes
is a connection between them. This costs one unit of resulting from the action. This reinforces object-centered
energy.
reasoning and ensures the model considers the outcome
AfterAbstraction comprehensively.Finally,wepromptWrite the action
This action enables a uav to move from [position1] to in the following format to elicit a well-structured
[position2] if [position1] and [position2] are
[state1]. This action will increase [value1] by PDDL action.
[value2].
3) Iterative Generation of Actions: Because the set of
1) Retrieval for Most Relevant In-context Example: In- fluentsisunknowninadvance,wemaintainadynamiclistof
context learning is critical for enabling LLMs to perform fluents throughout the generation process. After generating
structuredgenerationtaskssuchasPDDLdomainmodeling, each action, LLMs identify newly generated fluents, which
especially in zero-shot or low-resource settings. Similarly are then added to the list and reused in subsequent actions.
to RAG, we utilize our dataset as an external source of This strategy mitigates LLM context length limitations and
domain-specific knowledge. We extract all actions from the enablesincrementaldomainconstruction,reducingredundant
dataset and convert each into an abstract representation or inconsistent fluents.
using LLM to focus on semantic structures rather than Providing feedback to LLMs is key for iterative refine-
lexicalsimilarity,mitigatinglexicalnoise.Specifically,LLM ment.Whilepriorworksrelyonhuman[22]orenvironment-
replacesconcretenouns,adjectives,andnumericvalueswith level feedback [12], these methods face scalability and ac-
abstract placeholders such as [object], [state], and [value], cessibilitychallenges.ExistingPDDLsyntaxcheckers/parser
whilepreservingsubjectandverbtokenstoemphasizeaction also lack support for domains involving numeric. Here, we
semantics. LLM maintains a list of commonly used verbs. extend a simple STRIPS-style syntax validator in [22] to
If a verb in the description is semantically similar to one support numeric checking and producing error feedback
in the list, it is replaced. Otherwise, it is added to the list that can be directly used in the prompt, enabling a self-
and retained in the abstraction. We hypothesize that actions improvement loop. For instance (Eg. 2), consider the erro-
with similar semantic structures often correspond to similar neous precondition expression in the summation operator,
PDDL formulations. The example below shows an action’s where we can’t add a predicate to a numerical function.
Example 2: Syntax Checker In total, we evaluate 30 domains, consisting of 14 simple
(S.)domainsand16complex(C.)domainsasdeterminedby
Incorrectnumericalinputinprecondition:
domaincomplexityscores,andwesummarizethesedomain
(uav-number ?r - region); A function returning the
; number of UAV in region categories in Tab. I. The domains are grouped into seven
(is-uav ?u - uav); A predicate indicating whether categories: Navigation (autonomous flight), Transportation
; ?u is a UAV
(+ (uav-number ?r) (is-uav ?u)) ; erroneous summation (logistics), Manipulation (object interactions), Monitoring
(assessment),Exploration(coverage),AerialOperations,and
Syntaxcheckerfeedback:
Adaptation.Together, theyspantasksfrom low-levelcontrol
Head ‘at‘ in ‘Preconditions‘ is a predicate but should
be a function. Please revise to fix this error. to high-level decision-making. Note that for FS and Ours,
Note that you can always create new functions, but you which treat the dataset as an external source and retrieve
should also reuse existing functions whenever possible.
examplesfromit,weexplicitlyexcludeallinformationfrom
domain Dˆ itself to prevent bias. As shown in Fig. 2, after
V. EVALUATION
generating the domain, we evaluate it based on the number
This section presents a series of evaluations conducted on
ofsyntaxcorrections,errortypes,problem-solvingcapability,
our dataset to assess our prompt design. We aim to validate
and its overall feasibility and interpretability.
the following hypotheses:
• H1: The proposed prompt designs will mitigate syntax TABLEII
errors, leading to a syntactically correct domain. NUMBEROFEACHERRORTYPEACROSSALLDOMAINS.
• H2: The proposed prompt designs will increase the GPT-4.1-Mini
semantic correctness of the generated domains. Format FCoT FS Ours
Error Type
Semantic correctness is assessed using three criteria: 1) (S./C./T.) (S./C./T.) (S./C./T.) (S./C./T.)
Executability, defined as the problem-solving success rate;
object type 0/14/14 0/0/0 0/3/3 0/0/0
2) Feasibility, which measures whether plans generated
predicate names 2/2/4 1/7/8 2/2/4 2/4/6
in a domain can be executed on the GT domain; and 3) predicate format 1/5/6 1/5/6 0/1/1 0/1/1
Interpretability, which measures whether the GT plan can predicate usage 5/8/13 7/7/14 0/2/2 0/1/1
be executed within the generated domain. function names 0/3/3 0/0/0 0/1/1 0/1/1
We evaluate two LLMs: GPT-4.1-mini-2025-04-14 (GPT) function format 0/0/0 0/0/0 0/0/0 0/0/0
and DeepSeek-Chat , using four existing prompting varia- function usage 0/0/0 0/3/3 1/3/4 0/13/13
tions as benchmark methods. The compared methods and numeric usage 0/1/1 0/1/1 0/4/4 0/1/1
Total error count 8/33/41 9/23/32 3/16/19 2/21/23
their abbreviations are: 1) Format [22]: Prompted with two
regular examples for format referencing. 2) Format+CoT DeepSeek-Chat
(FCoT): Prompted with two regular examples for format Format FCoT FS Ours
Error Type
referencing, both including chain-of-thought reasoning. 3) (S./C./T.) (S./C./T.) (S./C./T.) (S./C./T.)
Format+Semantic(FS):Promptedwithoneregularexample
object type 0/4/4 0/1/1 0/5/5 0/2/2
forformatreferencingandonesemanticallyrelevantexample predicate names 1/3/4 1/4/5 0/0/0 0/0/0
for content referencing. 4) Retrieval+CoT (Ours): Our predicate format 6/11/17 1/5/6 2/1/3 0/1/1
framework retrieves one regular example for format refer- predicate usage 5/8/13 2/16/18 0/28/28 0/4/4
encing and one semantically relevant example for content function names 0/1/1 0/1/1 0/0/0 0/0/0
referencing, both including chain-of-thought reasoning. function format 0/0/0 0/0/0 0/0/0 0/0/0
function usage 1/12/13 1/2/3 0/2/2 0/1/1
TABLEI numeric usage 0/10/10 2/0/2 0/10/10 0/7/7
DOMAINCATEGORIESINSPAR. Total error count 13/49/62 7/29/36 2/46/48 0/15/15
Category Domains
Navigation 2DNavigation, HouseNavigation, Multi-
A. Evaluation of Syntax Corrections and Error Types
CamLand,SimpleNavigation
Transportation AirPassenger, CityCargo, Delivery, Deliv- We inspect and summarize the following syntax error
eryCapacity,DeliveryDurative,DeliveryPri-
types and their correction number: 1) Object type: The
ority, MedsDelivery, MedsDeliveryEnergy,
MealDelivery type in the action parameter does not match any type in
Manipulation BlockWorld, CeilingPaint, GraspDelivery, the Extern input. 2) Predicate and function names: The
GraspFruit,Watering
name of fluents conflicts with object type, existing predicate
Monitoring AirPollution, ForestFireCollaboration,
or function name, or PDDL keywords. 3) Predicate and
MaintenanceComponent,MovableObs
Exploration GridExplore,MarsExploration function format: Incorrect PDDL format inside predicates
AerialOperations Gate, Landing, Perching, Tracking, Wind- and functions. 4) Predicate and function usage: Incorrect
Disturbance
usageofpredicatesandfunctionswithrespecttotheirPDDL
Adaptation TerrainAdapt,SpeedAdapt
definitions. 5) Numeric usage: Incorrect PDDL format and
Given an input tuple (N ,N ,Extern) for domain Dˆ usage of numeric operators.
d A
in our dataset, we apply these four different methods to During generation, a syntax checker is employed to iden-
generate the corresponding PDDL domain Dˆ, respectively. tify errors and provide feedback for LLMs to correct them.
Fig.3. Executability(%),Feasibility(%),andInterpretability(%)scoresforeachmethodacross30generateddomains,andevaluatedonatotalof270
problems(90Simple,90Medium,and90Hard).
If the number of correction attempts exceeds the maximum the problem-solving rate of all four methods across our
allowed, we manually fix the remaining errors. The results dataset. We first use LLMs to generate 9 problem files (3
are presented in Table II. simple, 3 medium, and 3 hard problems) for each generated
Overall, GPT-4.1-Mini produces fewer total errors across domain.Eachproblemsharesthesameinitialstatesandgoals
all four methods compared to DeepSeek-Chat. The domi- with its corresponding GT problem in our dataset. We then
nant error types for GPT are object type, predicate usage, feed both the generated domain and its generated problem
and function usage, whereas DeepSeek-Chat’s errors are files into a classical planner, the ENHSP-20 solver [34], and
primarily concentrated in predicate format, predicate usage, report the results in the first row of Fig. 3. Overall, the
function usage, and numeric usage. This suggests that both GPTmodeloutperformsDeepSeek-Chatinsolvingrate.The
models struggle with generating fluent expressions that are FCoTmethodimprovesperformancebyapproximately16%
aligned with their definitions. whenusingGPT.Incontrast,theFSshowslimitedvariation
Among benchmark methods, Ours consistently yields the across the two models. The solving rate generally decreases
relativelylownumberoferrorsacrossbothLLMs,especially as the problem level increases and the domain complexity
for predicate usage errors. Comparing Ours with FCoT and increases. Among the four methods, Ours achieves the
with FS, we observe that combining structured CoT reason- highest solving rate of 95.19%, surpassing the Format
ing with relevant in-context examples improves generation method by about 14%. The next best performers are FS
qualityintermsofsyntax,regardlessofthemodel’sintrinsic and FCoT, suggesting that both chain-of-thought prompting
ability. In contrast, Format results in the highest error count andexampleretrievalcontributepositivelytosolvingperfor-
for both LLMs, with a particularly high error count from mance, while their combination yields greater improvement.
DeepSeek-Chat. While FS achieves the lowest error count However, successfully solving a problem merely indicates
withGPT,itsurprisinglyexhibitsahighnumberofpredicate that a valid sequence of actions can be found from the
usage errors with DeepSeek-Chat. This instability may arise initial state to the goal, i.e., the LLM-generated logic can
because the retrieved examples occasionally lack syntactic be executable by a planner. This does not imply that the
similarity to the target actions, leading DeepSeek-Chat to solutionissemanticallymeaningfulorfeasibleforexecution
incorrectly transfer structural patterns from the examples to by a robot in the ground-truth domain. Therefore, further
the current generation task. FCoT also results in relatively evaluation of semantic correctness is essential.
high error counts. However, it notably reduces object type
errors, suggesting that the reasoning steps in CoT prompts 2) Feasibility and Interpretability: To further assess the
help the model recall type constraints more accurately. semantical correctness of the generated domains and verify
It is noteworthy that function-related syntax errors remain whether the solved plans are feasible, we adopt a bidirec-
consistently absent across all methods and models, which tional domain validation strategy, inspired by [11, 12]. We
can be attributed to the smaller and more uniform nature of treat the GT Domain as the optimal formulation of the
functionsetscomparedtopredicates,makingtheirstructures environment, and the GT Plan was solved from the GT
easier for LLMs to reproduce reliably. In contrast, the Domain and GT Problem as a valid and feasible action
majority of errors arise in complex domains, supporting the sequencefromtheinitialstatetothefinalgoal.Intheforward
expectation that greater domain complexity increases the validation, we assess the feasibility of the generated domain
likelihood of syntactic mistakes. by executing the plan (Gen Plan) produced in the generated
domain on the GT Domain using VAL [35]. If the Gen
B. Evaluation of Semantic Correctness
Plan can be executed on the GT Domain, it implies that the
1) Executability: From the previous steps, the generated generated domain produces a feasible plan. The higher the
domainsareensuredtobesyntax-errorfree.Wethenevaluate numberoffeasibleGenPlans,themorereliablethegenerated
domain is in terms of feasibility.
domain: uavWatering; problem: watering-hard-3
In inverse validation, we assess domain interpretability by u1 u2 l3
executing the GT Plan within the generated domains (see
l1 l4 5: (move u2 l2 l1)
Fig.2).SuccessfulexecutionoftheGTPlanindicatesthatthe 1: (move u2 l1 l2) 3: (move u1 l1 l2) 6: (refill u1 p2 l2)
2: (refill u2 p1 l2) 4: (load-pot u1 p2 l2) 7: (watering-pour-to-
fill u2 p1 l1)
generated domain can reproduce the same action behaviors
astheGTDomain,therebydemonstratingitsinterpretability. l2 0: (load-pot u2 p1 l1)
A higher number of executable GT Plans reflects greater
interpretabilityofthegenerateddomain.Feasibilityandinter-
pretability results are presented in the second and third rows
of Fig. 3. Overall, interpretability scores are consistently
higher than feasibility scores across all generated domains.
8: (move u2 l1 l4)
9: (watering-pour-to-fill u2 p1 l4) 10: (move u2 l4 l3)
The highest feasibility and interpretability are achieved by
the Ours method using GPT. Notably, the FCoT method
yields slightly lower feasibility and interpretability scores
compared to the Format, indicating that CoT alone does
not improve domain feasibility or interpretability. However,
incorporating relevant examples (FS and Ours) significantly 11: (watering-pour-to-fill u1 p2 l2) 13: (move u1 l2 l3)
12: (refill u1 p2 l2) 14: (watering-pour-to-fill u1 p2 l3)
boosts performance in both metrics. Fig. 5. Simulation of two UAVs serving four regions in the Watering
domain. Example PDDL plan for watering-hard-3. UAVs u1 and u2 coor-
VI. SIMULATIONASSETSOFSPAR dinatetoloadpots,movebetweenlocations,refillatwatersources(l1and
l2),andperformsequentialwateringactions.Theactionwatering-pour-to-
To test the domains generated by our framework in sim-
fillrepresentspouringwatertomeetalocation’sdemand.
ulation, we customized a diverse set of 20 Gazebo environ-
ments spanning all domain categories described in Sec. V.
A. Case Study: UAV Watering tasks
This collection provides comprehensive coverage of tasks
This domain models a UAV-based watering system where
representative of real-world aerial robotic scenarios within a
each UAV carries a single pot, refills at water sources, and
fully autonomous pipeline. Fig. 4 shows the complete set of
pours water into target regions. The amount poured depends
environments. SPAR is designed to be long-term and easily
on the pot’s level and the location’s demand. The domain is
extensible: new environments and tasks can be incorporated
extendable to multi-UAV settings. As shown in Fig. 5, two
as additional use cases arise. In this paper, we report on
UAVscoordinatebyloadingpots,movingbetweenlocations,
the current set of problems, with future releases to expand
refilling at sources, and performing watering actions.
therepositoryaccordingly.Inthefollowing,weillustratethe
resultsusingtwocomplexgenerateddomainsascasestudies. B. Case Study: Multi-Robot Coordination
This domain simulates a heterogeneous team of UAVs
and unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs) in a discretized
environment where positions may be free, blocked by fixed
obstacles, or blocked by movable obstacles. UAVs can fly
between positions to detect obstacles and determine their
type, while UGVs can only traverse clear positions but are
capable of pushing movable obstacles to adjacent locations
to clear paths. We demonstrate a medium-level problem in
Fig. 6, where a UAV detects a movable object, verifies
clearance, and then enables the UGV to complete the push
action for coordinated obstacle removal.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced a framework for automatic
PDDL domain generation via LLMs, with UAV planning as
a representative scenario. By developing a validated dataset
of UAV domains and problems and designing a prompt
framework tailored for domain generation, we demonstrated
that LLMs can effectively produce domains that are both
syntactically valid and semantically accurate. Our evalu-
Fig.4. Gazebosimulationenvironmentsacrossdifferentdomains(ordered ations show that the generated domains not only satisfy
as in Tab. I). Row 1: Navigation (2D, House, MultiCamLand, Simple). structural requirements but also have strong feasibility and
Row2:Transportation.Row3:Manipulation.Row4:Monitoring.Row5:
interpretabilityrelativetoground-truthcounterparts,enabling
Exploration (left two) and Aerial Operations (right two). The Adaptation
domaincombinesvariationsoftheseenvironments,whileWindDisturbance faster development, testing, and evaluation cycles. The pro-
ismodeledasanadditionalwindfieldindependentoftheenvironment. posed dataset and pipeline also have significant potential
[13] T.Zhang,L.Zhang,Z.Hou,Z.Wang,Y.Gu,P.Clark,C.Callison-
domain: MovableObs; problem: detect-mov-then-push
Burch, and N. Tandon, “PROC2PDDL: Open-domain planning rep-
p3 resentations from texts,” in Proc. of the 2nd Workshop on Natural
p1
LanguageReasoningandStructuredExplanations,Aug.2024,pp.13–
24.
p2 [14] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal,
0: (uav-detect-mov u1 p2) H. Ku¨ttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rockta¨schel, S. Riedel, and
D. Kiela, “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive
nlp tasks,” in Proc. of the 34th International Conference on Neural
InformationProcessingSystems,2020.
[15] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and
Y.Cao,“React:Synergizingreasoningandactinginlanguagemodels,”
preprintarXiv:2210.03629,2022.
1: (move-uav u1 p2 p3)
2: (uav-detect-clear u1 p3) 3: (push g1 p1 p2 p3) (1) [16] M. Aghzal, E. Plaku, G. J. Stein, and Z. Yao, “A survey on large
languagemodelsforautomatedplanning,”preprintarXiv:2502.12435.
[17] P.Cao,T.Men,W.Liu,J.Zhang,X.Li,X.Lin,D.Sui,Y.Cao,K.Liu,
andJ.Zhao,“Largelanguagemodelsforplanning:Acomprehensive
andsystematicsurvey,”preprintarXiv:2505.19683,2025.
[18] J.-W. Choi, Y. Yoon, H. Ong, J. Kim, and M. Jang, “Lota-bench:
Benchmarkinglanguage-orientedtaskplannersforembodiedagents,”
3: (push g1 p1 p2 p3) (2) 3: (push g1 p1 p2 p3) (3) in The 12th International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024.
[19] T. Silver, S. Dan, K. Srinivas, J. B. Tenenbaum, L. Kaelbling, and
Fig.6. Simulationofadetect-mov-then-pushintheMovableObsdomain.
M.Katz,“Generalizedplanninginpddldomainswithpretrainedlarge
AUAV(u1)collaborateswithaUGV(g1)toremoveobstacles.TheUAV
languagemodels,”inProc.oftheThirty-EighthAAAIConferenceon
detectsamovableobjectatp2,verifiesclearanceatp3,andtheUGVatp1
ArtificialIntelligence. AAAIPress,2024.
pushestheobjectfromp2top3.
[20] Y.Wu,Y.Tao,P.Li,G.Shi,G.S.Sukhatme,V.Kumar,andL.Zhou,
“Hierarchical llms in-the-loop optimization for real-time multi-robot
for extending automatic domain generation to other robotic targettrackingunderunknownhazards,”preprintarXiv:2409.12274,
2024.
platforms, multi-agent planning, and real-world deployment,
[21] Y.Xie,C.Yu,T.Zhu,J.Bai,Z.Gong,andH.Soh,“Translatingnatural
opening new opportunities at the intersection of language language to planning goals with large-language models,” preprint
models and automated planning. arXiv:2302.05128,2023.
[22] L.Guan,K.Valmeekam,S.Sreedharan,andS.Kambhampati,“Lever-
agingpre-trainedlargelanguagemodelstoconstructandutilizeworld
REFERENCES modelsformodel-basedtaskplanning,”inThirty-seventhConference
onNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,2023.
[1] C.Aeronautiques,A.Howe,C.Knoblock,I.D.McDermott,A.Ram, [23] P. Smirnov, F. Joublin, A. Ceravola, and M. Gienger, “Generat-
M. Veloso, D. Weld, D. W. Sri, A. Barrett, D. Christianson et al., ing consistent pddl domains with large language models,” preprint
“Pddl—the planning domain definition language,” Technical Report, arXiv:2404.07751,2024.
Tech.Rep.,1998. [24] G.France´s,M.Ramirez,andCollaborators,“Tarski:AnAIplanning
[2] M.Ramirez,M.Papasimeon,N.Lipovetzky,L.Benke,T.Miller,A.R. modelingframework,”https://github.com/aig-upf/tarski,2018.
Pearce, E. Scala, M. Zamani et al., “Integrated hybrid planning and [25] M.Cao,T.-M.Nguyen,S.Yuan,A.Anastasiou,A.Zacharia,S.Pa-
programmedcontrolforrealtimeuavmaneuvering.”inAAMAS,2018, paioannou, P. Kolios, C. G. Panayiotou, M. M. Polycarpou, X. Xu
pp.1318–1326. et al., “Cooperative aerial robot inspection challenge: A benchmark
[3] M.Han,Y.Zhu,S.-C.Zhu,Y.N.Wu,andY.Zhu,“Interpret:Interac- forheterogeneousmulti-uncrewed-aerial-vehicleplanningandlessons
tivepredicatelearningfromlanguagefeedbackforgeneralizabletask learned,”IEEERobot.Autom.Mag.,2025.
planning,”inProc.ofRobot.:Sci.andSyst.,2024. [26] K. Ye, H. Tang, B. Liu, P. Dai, L. Cao, and R. Ji, “More clear,
[4] C. R. Garrett, T. Lozano-Pe´rez, and L. P. Kaelbling, “Pddlstream: moreflexible,moreprecise:Acomprehensiveorientedobjectdetection
Integrating symbolic planners and blackbox samplers via optimistic benchmarkforuav,”preprintarXiv:2504.20032,2025.
adaptive planning,” Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Automated Planning [27] J.Xiao,Y.Sun,Y.Shao,B.Gan,R.Liu,Y.Wu,W.Gua,andX.Deng,
andScheduling,vol.30,no.1,pp.440–448,Jun.2020. “Uav-on: A benchmark for open-world object goal navigation with
aerialagents,”preprintarXiv:2508.00288,2025.
[5] B.Liu,Y.Jiang,X.Zhang,Q.Liu,S.Zhang,J.Biswas,andP.Stone,
[28] J.Xie,K.Zhang,J.Chen,T.Zhu,R.Lou,Y.Tian,Y.Xiao,andY.Su,
“Llm+p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning
proficiency,”preprintarXiv:2304.11477,2023. “Travelplanner: A benchmark for real-world planning with language
agents,”in41stInternationalConferenceonMachineLearning,2024.
[6] G. Dagan, F. Keller, and A. Lascarides, “Dynamic planning with a
[29] X. Wang, D. Yang, Y. Liao, W. Zheng, B. Dai, H. Li, S. Liu et al.,
llm,”preprintarXiv:2308.06391,2023.
“Uav-flowcolosseo:Areal-worldbenchmarkforflying-on-a-worduav
[7] V. Strobel and A. Kirsch, MyPDDL: Tools for Efficiently Creating
imitationlearning,”preprintarXiv:2505.15725,2025.
PDDL Domains and Problems. Cham: Springer International Pub-
[30] R.E.FikesandN.J.Nilsson,“Strips:Anewapproachtotheappli-
lishing,2020,pp.67–90.
cationoftheoremprovingtoproblemsolving,”ArtificialIntelligence,
[8] P. Smirnov, F. Joublin, A. Ceravola, and M. Gienger, “Generat-
vol.2,no.3,pp.189–208,1971.
ing consistent pddl domains with large language models,” preprint
[31] “Internationalplanningcompetition,”http://ipc.icaps-conference.org/.
arXiv:2404.07751,2024.
[32] D. Pellier and H. Fiorino, “Pddl4j: a planning domain description
[9] V. Khandelwal, A. Sheth, and F. Agostinelli, “Pddlfuse: A tool for
library for java,” Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial
generatingdiverseplanningdomains,”preprintarXiv:2411.19886.
Intelligence,vol.30,no.1,pp.143–176,2018.
[10] A. Aguinaldo, E. Patterson, and W. Regli, “Automating transfer of
[33] “all-mpnet-base-v2: a sentence-transformers model,” https:
robottaskplansusingfunctorialdatamigrations,”IEEETrans.Autom.
//huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2.
Sci.Eng.,vol.22,pp.19484–19498,2025.
[34] E. Scala, A. Saetti, I. Serina, and A. E. Gerevini, “Search-guidance
[11] J. Oswald, K. Srinivas, H. Kokel, J. Lee, M. Katz, and S. Sohrabi,
mechanisms for numeric planning through subgoaling relaxation,”
“Largelanguagemodelsasplanningdomaingenerators,”inProc.of
Proc.oftheIntl.Conf.onAutomatedPlanningandScheduling,vol.30,
theIntl.Conf.onAutomatedPlanningandScheduling,2024.
no.1,pp.226–234,Jun.2020.
[12] S.Mahdavi,R.Aoki,K.Tang,andY.Cao,“Leveragingenvironment [35] “Val,”https://github.com/KCL-Planning/VAL.
interaction for automated PDDL translation and planning with large
languagemodels,”inTheThirty-eighthAnnualConferenceonNeural
InformationProcessingSystems,2024.
