PIP-LLM: Integrating PDDL-Integer Programming with LLMs for
Coordinating Multi-Robot Teams Using Natural Language
Guangyao Shi1†, Yuwei Wu2, Vijay Kumar2, Gaurav S. Sukhatme1
Abstract—Enablingrobotteamstoexecutenaturallanguage where feasibility and optimality are equally critical. Con-
commands requires translating high-level instructions into sequently, many recent works integrate LLMs with classi-
feasible, efficient multi-robot plans. While Large Language
cal planning [8], for example, by translating natural lan-
Models (LLMs) combined with Planning Domain Description
guage (NL) commands into Planning Domain Description
Language (PDDL) offer promise for single-robot scenarios,
existing approaches struggle with multi-robot coordination Language (PDDL) and leveraging existing solvers [9, 10].
due to brittle task decomposition, poor scalability, and low Yet, most of these approaches remain limited to single-
coordination efficiency. We introduce PIP-LLM, a language- robot domains, and extending them to multi-robot contexts
based coordination framework that consists of PDDL-based
introduces additional challenges. First, formulating multi-
team-levelplanningandIntegerProgramming(IP)basedrobot-
robot problems into a single structured representation is
level planning. PIP-LLMs first decomposes the command by
translatingthecommandintoateam-levelPDDLproblemand significantly more complex, and LLMs frequently produce
solves it to obtain a team-level plan, abstracting away robot erroneous or incomplete encodings (“hallucinations” [11]–
assignment. Each team-level action represents a subtask to be [15])whenhandlinglargeteamsandcomplextasks.Second,
finishedbytheteam.Next,thisplanistranslatedintoadepen-
even with correct formulations, standard solvers for PDDL
dency graph representing the subtasks’ dependency structure.
often fail to scale to the large state and action spaces of
Such a dependency graph is then used to guide the robot-
level planning, in which each subtask node will be formulated multi-robot planning. Third, numeric objectives and con-
as an IP-based task allocation problem, explicitly optimizing straints (e.g., energy minimization or resource-constrained
travel costs and workload while respecting robot capabilities task allocation) are difficult to specify in PDDL, and the
and user-defined constraints. This separation of planning from
corresponding solvers remain underdeveloped.
assignment allows PIP-LLM to avoid the pitfalls of syntax-
Several efforts have attempted to extend the LLM+classic
based decomposition and scale to larger teams. Experiments
acrossdiversetasksshowthatPIP-LLMimprovesplansuccess planning paradigm to multi-robot systems. Bai et al. [16]
rate, reduces maximum and average travel costs, and achieves propose decomposing PDDL goals into robot-specific sub-
better load balancing compared to state-of-the-art baselines. goals to decouple planning across robots. However, their
method does not generalize well to teams with more than
I. INTRODUCTION
two robots or scenarios where decomposition is non-trivial.
A long-standing goal in multi-robot research is to create
Zhang et al. [17] introduce LaMMA-P, which extends the
systemsthattakeconcisehumanlanguagecommandsandau-
architecture proposed by Kannan et al. [6] by incorpo-
tomatically generate executable coordination plans for robot
rating PDDL planning for each robot. Both frameworks
teams. Achieving this level of autonomy requires accurate
rely heavily on pure syntactic segmentation and analysis of
interpretation of human commands, decomposition of these
natural language commands for task decomposition, which
commands into executable subtasks, and effective allocation
is inherently unreliable. For instance, suppose the command
oftasksacrossrobots[1].Recentadvancesinlargelanguage is "put five apples in the fridge", the naive
models(LLMs)offerapromisingpathtowardthisobjective.
decomposition based on syntactic segmentation and anal-
LLMs, trained on large-scale text corpora, exhibit ysis is to decompose the task into five subtasks, each of
common-sense reasoning abilities and can process a wide which is to put an apple in the fridge. However, some
range of tasks expressed in natural language. They have robots may be capable of moving two apples at a time,
achieved notable success in domains such as robotic ma- and some robots move one. How to decompose the task
nipulation [2, 3], navigation [4], and locomotion [5]. Some depends not only on textual information but also on the
studies have directly employed LLMs as task planners, robots’ capabilities and their availability. Similarly, a com-
showing moderate success in single-robot sequencing prob- mand such as "put all fruits and vegetables
lems. However, in more complex scenarios, LLMs alone on the table into fridges 1 and 2" requires
often produce suboptimal or infeasible solutions [6, 7], contextual reasoning about object quantities and container
which is especially problematic in multi-robot coordination capacities, which cannot be captured by naive language
segmentation. These limitations hinder their applicability to
1Guangyao Shi and Gaurav S. Sukhatme are with with the Department
large-scale, heterogeneous, or long-horizon tasks. Moreover,
ofComputerScience,UniversityofSouthernCalifornia,LosAngeles,CA
90089,USA.Email:{shig, gaurav}@usc.edu. their frameworks implicitly assume a special case of multi-
2Yuwei Wu and Vijay Kumar are with the GRASP Lab, University robot task allocation (MRTA) [18] where the number of
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Email: {yuweiwu,
kumar}@seas.upenn.edu. subtasks is no greater than the number of robots and al-
† Correspondingauthor. location is determined solely by skill requirements without
5202
tcO
62
]OR.sc[
1v48722.0152:viXra
0.0:OpenObject fridge1
Verifier 1.0:OpenObject fridge2
2.0:StoreObject apple table1 fridge1
Y Y … 1 H o o) e. u ua r r e w ttaa a il s l s r e k b k e s dis o e p m ts r o o c e v rai i p i d n n t e a s io d l t yn r z u w ie c n it t h w i n o ha n fo et s u l t . lo hra w elr i l n at g hn eg in up f a o lag r n m e m a fo t a i r o k n ae : ss cseennese… o.r no5t)aandPDreDpLorptrsoubclehminffoilerm6a)tioan ptlaonP fDouDnLdp sroo bfalermgenerator. Teamplan 3 4 5 . . . 0 0 0 : : : S S C t t l o o o r r s e e e O O O b b b j j j e e e c c c t t t b l f e r a t id t n u g a c e n e 1 a ta ta b b le le 1 1 fr f i r d id g g e e 2 1
Outputrequirements:… 6.0:CloseObject fridge2
PDDLplan
Task:
p 1 u a t n a d ll f p ru u i t ts v e o g n e t t a a b b l l e es 1 in in to to f r f i r d id g g e e 2 . Solver:FastDownward,ENHSP,OPTIC,… Constructdependencygraphandtraverseitforcoordination
1.0 4.0 6.0
PDDLproblem
Context:
T ba h n is a s n c a e , n … e , in le c t l t u u d c e e s , : b a re p a p d le , , … Debugger root Robot-levelPlanning
You will be provided with following information:
R on el f a lo ti o o r n ; s a : p b p o le ok is is on on ta c b h le air 1 ; , B … oxis f 13 Yin )) oi s aa uh r td t a t e ha ss es kc k t rd a i i pe ss t s k i t oc o nr i c p a h tib e oo c nu k it n w t hn h ea e t t ru h er e laa r l t t ilo h an e ns g P ub D ae D gtwe L e f p oe r rn o a b o l b e sj m ceec n f t i se le .i n is 2t h s ) y ea n s t d a cee c s t n i c c er .i a p4 n t)i d o a n s P e a m bDoD a u n Lt t i td c ho e c m o o r ab r i e nje c cf t i tl s es u .in ch 5t h) th ea a sP t c i De f Dn w eL e p s r o o lv b e le i m t w f e ile can 0.0 2.0 3.0 5.0
….
…He.rearesomeinstructions.
Domain: Outputrequirements:…
( : ( p a r t e - d lo ic c a a t t e io s n ?object - object ?location - object) PDDLproblem Foreachtraversednodeingraph, solveIP-based
(cleaned ?object - object) multi-robot taskallocationEq.4toEq.6
(break ?object - object) PDDLProblemGenerator
… You will be provided with following information:
( ( ( ( o c s :a l u p o c p e s t p i n e o o n ? ? r x t x R i v - e - e o l o o ? b b c o j j a e e b t c c j e e t t ) O ) c t b - j e o c b t j e ; ; … c ; ; t i i ) s s - - c ) o ) lo p s e e n d 13 Y… H )) o e . aa u re r td a t a e a s r s s e kc k r s d i i o pe s m t si t oc o e nr , i p i f n a o t s ib r o t on r t u h u it e c n t t i g hn o i ea n v t e s rue . n rl aa ta lt il s oa k nn , sg g ub e ae n gt e we r e a foe te rn a a o bs P jce D ec D ntse L . i p n r 2 o th) b e l a e s m dce e f sn il c e er . .ip4t)io an PabDoDuLt tdhoem oabinje cfitles .in the scene Robot1: 0.0:OpenObjectfridge1 3.0 StoreObjectbananatable1fridge1
( ( ( : : : a a a c c c t t t i i i o o o n n n S S O t w p o e i r t e c n h O O O b b n j j e e c c … t t … … ) ) ) t …O Wh u eh t p ceo u nn t yt r e e ox q ut u gd ir ee e ns m ec e rrai n pt t te s io : Pn … D.wDeL jpursotb nleemeds ,t ofi rcsot ndseidciedre t hwohsiceh o obbjejecctsts t haaret arerele rvealenvt afonrt tinh eo utar spkr obbalseemd foilne the task description and Robot2:3.0:StoreObjectbananatable1fridge1 5.0:CloseObjectfridge1
…
Team-levelPlanning
Robot3:1.0:OpenObjectfridge2 4.0:StoreObjectlettucetable1fridge2 6.0:CloseObjectfridge2
Fig.1. OverviewofPIP-LLM.Usersprovidethetask,context,andPDDLdomaindescriptioninnaturallanguage(orangebox).Then,LLMswillanalyze
therelevantinformationtoconstructaPDDLprobleminstance(PDDLProblemGenerator).Next,theresultisfedtoaDebugger andaVerifier,which
willcheckthesyntaxofPDDLproblemsandthecorrectnessofthesolutionandfeedtheinformationbacktotheproblemgenerationLLM.Thegeneration
processmayberepeatedseveralrounds.Eachactionintheoutputplancorrespondstoasubtaskthattherobotsasateamcando.Then,PIP-LLMusesthis
plantoconstructadependencygraphtoidentifythedependenciesbetweensubtasksandfacilitateparallelexecution,whichwillthenbeusedtoallocate
andschedulerobotstofinishallsub-tasks(greenbox,robot-levelplanning).
explicitly considering task costs (e.g., travel distance) and • We propose a novel multi-robot task planning frame-
the transition costs between tasks. Generally, however, the work that integrates PDDL-based team-level planning
number of subtasks may exceed the number of robots in with IP-based robot-level allocation, enabling flexible
MRTA; tasks may vary in duration; and robots may need to and efficient coordination of robot teams using natural
transitbetweenmultipletasks.Withoutexplicitlyconsidering language commands.
task costs, solutions can be highly suboptimal; without • Weintroduceabenchmarkdatasetforevaluatingmulti-
propercoordination,workloadimbalancesleadtolargetravel robot task planning in large-scale, long-horizon scenar-
costs of a particular robot, i.e., some robots are busy all the ios involving many robots and objects.
time while others keep idling. • We provide extensive simulation results and demon-
To address these challenges, we propose a novel frame- strate real-world applications to validate the effective-
work, PIP-LLM, for language-driven multi-robot coordi- ness and scalability of the proposed framework.
nation (Fig. 1). The key idea is to form a hierarchical
planning structure: using LLM+PDDL for team-level task
II. RELATEDWORK
understanding and then using Integer Programming (IP) for Recent advances have demonstrated the potential of inte-
robot assignments. Specifically, given a natural language grating LLMs with individual robotic platforms to enable
command,ourframeworkfirstformulatesateam-levelPDDL natural human–robot interaction and high-level task plan-
problem that captures what the robot team as a whole must ning. By leveraging the strengths of LLMs in language
accomplish, independent of specific robot assignments. The understandingandcontextualreasoning,thesesystemstrans-
resulting plan is then represented as a dependency graph by late free-form instructions into executable action sequences.
analyzing action dependencies, which will then be used to Because natural language is inherently contextual and se-
schedule the robotic team. Unlike prior work that relies on mantic, LLMs are well-suited for navigation, exploration,
syntactic segmentation, this approach provides semantically and instruction following; in such settings, they help ground
groundedandformaltaskdecompositionbyformulatingand linguistic inputs into spatial and semantic representations
solving PDDL problems. In the second stage, a skill-based that guide behavior in complex, partially observed environ-
allocation framework using IP assigns tasks to robots based ments [19]–[21]. In addition, modules for real-time resi-
on their capabilities and task costs, ensuring both feasibility dency [22] and anomaly detection [23] have been integrated
and efficiency. This two-level design enables the framework into LLM-based robotic pipelines to improve robustness in
to robustly handle complex commands, scale efficiently to dynamic and unforeseen conditions.
large numbers of robots and objects, and achieve more Built on this, researchers are increasingly exploring how
balancedandnear-optimalexecution.Furthermore,userpref- LLMs can facilitate coordination for multi-robot teams [6,
erences can be seamlessly incorporated into task allocation; 7, 24]–[27]. Some pioneering works seek to design prompt
for example, constraints expressed in natural language, such frameworkstosolvemulti-robotcoordinationproblemsusing
as excluding a particular robot from certain tasks. mainly LLMs [6, 7]. Zhao et al. [7] proposed a dialogue-
The main contributions of this paper are as follows: based framework to coordinate multiple robots. Such ap-
proaches are not suitable to solve long-horizon and large- B. Problem Statement
scale multi-robot problems because such problems will re-
Givena high-levelnatural-language instructionI, ouraim
quire robots to communicate many rounds with redundant
is to parse the instruction, decompose it into the requisite
(possibly misleading as the number of rounds increases)
subtasks, and synthesize an executable plan. Subtasks are
information. LLMs tend to get lost and hallucinate. Chen
scheduled to maximize robot utilization, enabling parallel
et al. [25] did an extensive evaluation of communication
execution when precedence and resource constraints allow.
frameworks (centralized, decentralized, or hybrid) to find
Environment E contains multiple robots and objects, and I
a scalable solution for multi-robot coordination. Another
is assumed to be feasible within E.
representative work along this direction is [6], in which the
authors propose a framework for multi-robot task planning IV. PROPOSEDFRAMEWORK
based on the canonical decomposition of multi-robot task
A. Overview
planning, i.e., task decomposition, coalition formation, and
task allocation [1]. Such a framework does not use any The proposed framework is shown in Fig. 1, which hier-
external tools and purely relies on LLMs’ reasoning ca- archically conducts task planning for multi-robot systems.
pability to solve problems. However, it cannot be used to Team-Level Planning. Given a task description in natural
coordinate large-scale robot teams, and it does not consider language, LLMs will first analyze the context information,
the optimality aspects of the coordination. relevantpredicates,andgoalsthatneedtobeachieved.Based
on this analysis, it will construct a PDDL problem instance.
Another line of work uses LLMs to translate natural
Then, the problem instance will be fed to a Debugger and
languageintostructuredintermediaterepresentations[17,24,
a Verifier, which will check the syntax of PDDL problems
28, 29]. Xu et al. [24] use hierarchical temporal logic as an
and the correctness of the solution and feed the information
intermediate representation for temporally dependent multi-
backtotheproblemgenerationLLM.Thegenerationprocess
robot task planning. Zhang et al. [17] extend [6] by adding
will be repeated until the set loop limit is reached. Each
a PDDL representation for each robot’s individual planning.
action in the output plan corresponds to a subtask that the
Ourworkalignswiththisdirection.Theproposedframework
robots as a team can do. Then, we will use this plan to
adoptsahierarchicalstructurethatemploystwodistinctrep-
construct a dependency graph, which helps us to identify
resentationsatdifferentlevels:PDDLforteam-levelplanning
the dependencies between subtasks and facilitate parallel
and IP for robot-level planning. Our framework can cover
execution. Details on how to construct such task trees will
both the feasibility and optimality aspects of multi-robot
be discussed in Sec. IV-B. The team-level planning part of
coordination and is very suitable for long-horizon tasks that
PIP-LLM is, in essence, doing task decomposition. But it is
involve a large number of robots.
fundamentally different from those in [6, 17] which rely on
syntacticlanguagesegmentationtodecomposetasks.Instead,
III. PROBLEMFORMULATION
our framework uses LLMs to construct a formal high-level
planandrepresenttasksasastructuredformat,adependency
A. Preliminaries
tree. It should be noted that our team-level PDDL planning
PDDL: As a standard, declarative language for specifying problem is different from the robot-specific PDDL planning
automated planning tasks [30, 31], it separates the domain, problem [16, 17] in the sense that the action is about the
which specifies types, predicates, and parameterized actions teamasawholecanwithoutreferringtoanyspecificrobots.
with preconditions and effects, from the problem, which Such an abstract reduces the information fed to LLMs and
enumerates concrete objects, an initial state, and goals. allows them to do high-level reasoning more accurately.
Beyond the basic STRIPS subset, PDDL supports richer
constructssuchasconditionalandquantifiedeffects,numeric
Algorithm 1: Dependency Graph Scheduling
fluents, and durative actions.
Input : A subtask dependency graph G =(V,E)
Robot Model: We consider a set of N (possibly) heteroge-
Output: Ordered robot actions
neous robots, R = {R1,R2,...,RN}. Let ∆ denote the
1 create empty stack H # stack for BFS frontier
set of all skills or actions that a robot may be capable
2 H.insert(root)
of performing. We assume that skills in ∆ are either pre-
3 while schedule is triggered and H is not empty do
implemented in the system or accessible through available
4 current subtasks ← H.next task()
API calls. Each agent Rn possesses a subset of skills, Sn ⊆
5 sol ← skill MRTA (current subtasks)
∆,subjecttospecificconstraints.Forexample,therobotskill
6 allocate subtasks to robots using sol
PickUpObjectmaybelimitedbythemaximummassthat
7 add child nodes of current subtasks in G to H
the robot can lift.
8 end
Environment Model: We assume a static and deterministic
environment. The state of the environment can be explicitly
represented. The number of objects and robots is fixed, and Robot-Level Planning. The constructed dependency graph
therobot’sactionwillhaveadeterministiceffectonthestate will then be used to allocate and schedule robots to finish
of the environment. all sub-tasks. Specifically, we will traverse the task tree in
a Breadth-First-Search (BFS) fashion. We maintain a BFS Algorithm 2: Dependency Graph Generation
frontier in a stack. The task nodes in this frontier can be Input :
executed in parallel. When we need to allocate robots for • A PDDL domain file, a problem file
the task, we pop one node from the frontier and update • A plan file P as an ordered list
the stack. More details are given in Algo. 1. Whenever we
Output: A subtask dependency graph G
traverse a node in the dependency graph, we will solve a
1 G ← root node
skill-basedMRTAproblemtoallocatethesubtasktospecific
2 for action index, action in P do
robots to finish. Details will be discussed in Sec. IV-C. # trace back to find a proper parent node
Moreover,wemayincorporatehumanpreferenceconstraints 3 for i in range(action index-1, 1, −1) do
into the MRTA formulation to accommodate humans’ extra 4 flag ← Check dependency(action, P[i])
requirements of robots. 5 if flag and no parent node added then
Combiningbothteam-levelplanningandrobot-levelplan- 6 add action as child node of P[i] in G
ning, as we will show in the experiments, such a hierarchy 7 break
planning structure in our framework can not only achieve a 8 end
high success rate in fulfilling diverse tasks, but also improve 9 end
theoverallcoordinationefficiencyofthemulti-robotsystems 10 if no parent node added then
compared to baselines. 11 add action as child node of root of G
B. From Team-Level Plan to Subtask Dependency Graph 12 end
13 end
The output from the PDDL planner is a sequence of team
14 return G
actions. If we execute the actions in order, we can finish
the tasks. However, it is not necessary to strictly follow the
orderbecausesomeactionsintheplanmaybeparallelizable.
An example is shown in Fig. 1. Given the domain, we can skills are Y = (cid:2) y 1 , y 2 , ..., y U (cid:3)T ∈ R ≥ U 0 , with y u = 0 if
get a team plan as shown at the upper right of Fig. 1. skill u is unnecessary and y u >0 otherwise.
It should be noted that for the first action (OpenObject Assigning robot i to a task incurs a cost c i ∈ R ≥0 ; in
fridge1) in the plan, its effect will not affect any pre- this work, we take c i to be the total travel distance of robot
conditions in the next action (OpenObject fridge2). i. Given the task skill requirement, robot skill matrix, and
Similarly, there is no conflict in preconditions and effects the cost, we will solve the following lexicographic multi-
betweenStoreObject apple table1 fridge1and objective IP problem to decide robot task allocation,
StoreObject lettuce table1 fridge2.Insucha (cid:88)
min {maxc x , c x } (2a)
case, we can actually execute these two actions in parallel. i i i i i
i
Inspired by this, we propose a simple action parallelization
s.t. Qx≥Y, x ∈{0,1}, (2b)
algorithm as shown in Algo. 2 to parallelize the team i
actionsobtainedfromourteam-levelplanning.Theresulting customized constraints, (2c)
dependency graph of the plan is also in the robot-level
where x is a binary variable: x = 1 if robot i is assigned
i i
planning block of Fig. 1. to the task, otherwise 0; x = [x ,x ,...,x ]T. The first
1 2 N
C. Skill-based Multi-Robot Task Allocation objective max i c i x i denotes the maximum cost of the team,
(cid:80)
and the second objective c x denotes the sum of the
We consider a team of N (potentially heterogeneous) i i i
teamcost.Eq.(2c)denotesotherdomain-specificconstraints
robots, where each robot is characterized by a vector of
or preference constraints specified by users (an example is
continuous capability skills [32]. The skills of robot i are
given in Tab. III, ID=5). Such problems can be solved using
q(i) = (cid:2) q(i), q(i), ..., q(i)(cid:3) ∈RU , (1) existing solvers like Gurobi.
1 2 U ≥0
whereq(i) ∈R denotestheleveloftheu-thskill.Ifrobot V. EXPERIMENTS
u ≥0
ilacksskillu(e.g.,acar-likerobotcannotopenarefrigerator We conducted two types of simulation experiments to
door), then q(i) = 0; otherwise q(i) > 0 quantifies its evaluate the performance of the proposed PIP-LLM frame-
u u
capacity. For example, if a robot can pick up 2 units of work. In the first type of experiment, we use the AI2THOR
objects,itspickupskillis2.0.Stackingtherobotskillvectors simulator [33] as [6, 17], which is designed for domestic
gives the team skill matrix Q=[q(1)T,...,q(N)T]∈RU×N tasks. The goal of this type of experiment is to evaluate
+
whose i-th column and u-th row corresponds to robot i and whether the proposed framework can improve the team
skill u, respectively. coordination efficiency in terms of travel costs while not
Each task is specified by the skill requirements needed compromising the success rate. In the second type of ex-
to complete it. For example, the task put a lunch box periment, we used a customized warehouse environment
in the fridge may require the skills open door: 1.0, in Gazebo, which involved coordinating many robots to
close door: 1.0, pick up: 1.2, and drop: 1.2, where rearrange many objects. The goal of the second type of
1.2 encodes a weight affordance. Formally, the desired task experiment is to show the scalability and flexibility of the
proposedframeworkincoordinatingalargenumberofrobots • RU measures the planning efficiency of the action
withconciselanguagecommands.Moreover,wevalidateour sequencebycomparingthetotaltransitionsfromallsuc-
results with a hardware demonstration. cessful executions to the overall corresponding ground
truth count.
A. AI2THOR Benchmark Dataset • GCR is computed using the set difference between
ground truth goal conditions and final conditions
To evaluate the performance of PIP-LLM and facilitate
achieved, divided by the total number of ground truth
comparisonswithbaselinemethods,wecreatedabenchmark
goal conditions.
dataset by inheriting and modifying those from [6, 17].
• SR is calculated as the ratio of successful executions to
Specifically, the dataset consists of three categories of tasks
the total number of tasks.
tobetterevaluatetheperformanceoftheproposedframework
• TC-avg is the average travel cost for robots to finish all
with an increasing level of complexity.
the tasks. It is a metric for the coordination efficiency
• Compound Tasks involve multiple objects and can of the team.
be decomposed into sequential or parallel subtasks. • TC-max is the maximum total travel cost for robots to
The robot team is homogeneous, and each robot has finish all the tasks. It is a metric for the team’s load-
the necessary skills to finish all tasks. We need to balancing efficiency.
properly allocate and schedule tasks among robots.
We use SMART-LLM [6], LaMMA-P [17], and a basic
For example, Slice the lettuce, trash the
Chain of Thought (CoT) as our baselines using GPT-4o. We
mug and switch off the light.
evaluate our framework PIP-LLM using both GPT-4o and
• Complex Tasks are intended for heterogeneous robot Qwen-32B.
teams. It resembles Compound Tasks in their charac-
teristics, like task decomposition, multi-robot engage-
C. Results for AI2-THOR Environment
ment, and the presence of multiple objects. However,
unlike Compound Tasks, where individual robots can 1) Qualitativeresults: Anillustrativeexampleisshownin
perform subtasks independently, robots may need to Fig. 2. The task description is given in the caption. The first
perform a subtask cooperatively due to limitations in row presents screenshots of ours during the task execution,
their skills, e.g., a robot does not have the skill to open andthesecondrowcorrespondstobaselines.Thetravelcost
the fridge/microwave; a robot can only afford one unit of each robot is shown in Fig. 2d and 2h, respectively. As
of weight and cannot move an object of two units of we can see from the figures, our approach, by using object
weight1. We create a set of such tasks by either setting information and robot cost to optimize the task allocation
the robots’ corresponding skill to zero or increasing andscheduling,resultsinasmallertravelcost(shorterpaths
the weight of objects. Such tasks require strategic team for each robot), i.e., better coordination efficiency.
coordination for effective task completion. 2) Quantitative results: The main statistical results are
• Vague Tasks These tasks present additional chal- shown in Tab. I. Overall, in all GPT-4o-based frameworks,
lenges with ambiguous natural language instruc- ourframeworkshowssignificantimprovementintravelcost-
tions, which require the robots to infer miss- relatedmetrics(TC-sumandTC-max)comparedtothestate-
ing details. For example, gather up 3 school of-the-art baselines and shows a substantial increase in the
supplies on the bed; It is very bright successrate,especiallyinthevaguetasksgroup.Suchresults
and we do not need light. suggest that our framework can not only improve the team
coordination efficiency but also augment LLMs’ capability
Our dataset includes 41 compound tasks, 23 complex tasks,
to understand and analyze the tasks. We attribute such
and25vaguecommandtaskstoevaluatetaskdecomposition,
improvementstothefollowingreasons.First,ourframework
allocation, and execution efficiency.
introduces a hierarchical structure: team first, then robots.
On the team level, LLMs will be guided by the PDDL
B. Evaluation Baselines and Metrics
domainanddonotneedtogointodetailsofeachrobot,thus
We use the following evaluation metrics: Success Rate beinglesslikelytobedistractedbyredundantinformationto
(SR),RobotUtilization(RU),GoalConditionRecall(GCR), hallucinate. Besides, we introduce the debugger and checker
Executability (Exe), Sum of Travel Cost (TC-sum), Max of structure to allow the LLMs to correct themselves if the
TravelCost(TC-max),following[6,17,34].Ourevaluations first round of generation is not right. Second, on the robot
arebasedonthedataset’sfinalgroundtruthdemonstratedby level, we incorporate an explicit cost-aware task allocation
humans. and scheduling structure, which will inherently improve
the coordination efficiency. Tab. I also shows the result of
• Exeisthefractionofactionsinthetaskplanthatcanbe
using Qwen-32B for our framework. In such a case, the
executed,regardlessoftheirimpactontaskcompletion.
performanceofourframework,intermsofbothsuccessrate
and travel cost, remains significantly better than the naive
1AI2THOR does not support cooperative manipulation. When dealing
CoT framework with GPT-4o. These results demonstrate the
with such tasks, we manually inspect the plan and cost output from
frameworks,butdonotvisualizeplansinthesimulator. effectiveness of the proposed framework.
TABLEI
EVALUATIONOFPIP-LLMANDBASELINESINTHEAI2-THORSIMULATOR.
Compound Complex Vague
Methods
SR↑ TCmax/avg↓ GCR↑ RU↑ Exe↑ SR↑ TCmax/avg↓ GCR↑ RU↑ Exe↑ SR↑ TCmax/avg↓ GCR↑ RU↑ Exe↑
CoT(GPT-4o) 0.37 6.5/5.8 0.42 0.72 0.67 0.00 –/– 0.16 0.00 0.45 0.00 –/– 0.00 0.00 0.00
SMART-LLM(GPT-4o) 0.71 6.3/5.3 0.82 0.78 0.93 0.26 7.3/6.0 0.39 0.63 0.75 0.00 –/– 0.12 0.00 0.67
LaMMA-P(GPT-4o) 0.93 6.3/5.0 0.94 0.91 0.92 0.78 7.0/5.8 0.88 0.87 1.00 0.52 7.0/5.5 0.56 0.71 0.91
PIP-LLM(ours,GPT-4o) 0.93 5.3/4.3 0.95 1.00 1.00 0.87 5.8/4.5 0.92 0.90 1.00 0.68 6.0/4.8 0.77 0.82 0.91
PIP-LLM(ours,Qwen-32B) 0.63 5.8/4.8 0.72 1.00 0.93 0.48 6.5/5.5 0.45 0.81 0.64 0.40 0.14/0.14 0.35 0.77 0.54
(a)ours:PIP-LLM (b) (c) (d)
(e)SMART-LLM&LaMMA-P (f) (g) (h)
Fig. 2. An illustrative example to show the differences between our framework, PIP-LLM, and baselines (SMART-LLM and LaMMA-P). The task is
put potato and knife in sinkbasin and trash the bottle and cup. (a)-(d) show the execution of results from PIP-LLM. (e)-(h)
show the execution of baselines. The top left of (a) and (e) shows the allocated tasks of all robots. The top of (d) and (h) shows the cost of all robots.
Oursachievesmuchsmallermaximum/averagecost.Red,blue,andgreencolorscorrespondtorobots1,2,and3,respectively.
Methods Compound Complex Vague ing planning without generating explicit PDDL problems.
SR TCmax/avg SR TCmax/avg SR TCmax/avg As shown in the table, the success rate drops substantially
PIP-LLMw/oD 0.49 5.8/5.0 0.35 5.8/4.8 0.16 6.8/5.3
acrossallthreetaskcategories,underscoringthecriticalrole
PIP-LLMw/oB&V 0.68 5.5/4.3 0.43 6.5/5.0 0.32 6.3/4.8
PIP-LLMw/N=1 0.85 5.5/4.8 0.74 5.3/4.5 0.44 6.0/4.8 of the PDDL domain in guiding task understanding and
PIP-LLMw/N=3 0.90 5.8/4.8 0.83 6.0/4.8 0.60 6.0/4.5
PIP-LLMw/N=4 0.93 5.3/4.3 0.87 5.8/4.5 0.68 6.0/4.8 decomposition. In the second row, we remove the solution
PIP-LLMw/oAS 0.93 6.5/5.3 0.87 7.0/5.8 0.68 7.3/6.5
refinement loop, i.e., the debugger and verifier components
TABLEII (B and V). This results in a pronounced decline in success
ABLATIONSACROSSTHREECATEGORIES.WECONSIDERTHE rate, particularly for the complex and vague task groups,
FOLLOWINGKEYCOMPONENTSINFIG.1:TEAM-LEVELPLANNING highlightingtheeffectivenessofBandV.Tofurtherexamine
PDDLDOMAIN(D),DEBUGGER(B),VERIFIER(V),THENUMBEROF their impact, we vary the number of refinement loops (N)
ALLOWEDREFININGLOOPS(N),ANDTHETASKALLOCATIONAND from the third to the fifth rows. The results clearly indicate
SCHEDULINGCOMPONENT(AS).EVALUATIONISBASEDONGPT-4O. that increasing N consistently improves performance. We
adopt N = 4 for the results reported in Tab. I. Finally, in
the last row, we replace our task allocation and scheduling
D. Ablation Study for AI2-THOR Environment module with a purely LLM-based approach. This modifi-
cation led to a substantial increase in travel-related costs,
We conducted an ablation study to assess the contribution demonstratingtheefficiencyoftheproposedAS component
of individual components to the performance of PIP-LLMs in optimizing resource utilization.
in Tab. II. The following key components were considered:
E. Results for Gazebo Warehouse Environment
the team-level planning PDDL domain (D), the debugger
(B),theverifier(V),thenumberofallowedrefinementloops Since AI2THOR is designed for a small-scale household
(N),andthetaskallocationandschedulingmodule(AS).In setup, we cannot use it to test scalable multi-robot coordi-
the first row, we exclude the PDDL domain D and allow the nation. To this end, we create a customized warehouse envi-
LLMs to design team-level actions autonomously, perform- ronment in Gazebo for the second part of our experiments,
(a) (b)
(a) (b)
box2
box2
box1
(c) (d)
(c) (d)
Fig. 5. Snapshots of hardware experiments. The task is Push boxes
to their corresponding goals.Theplannedpathsforrobotsare
marked as blue, green, and red dots, respectively, in (a). Three robots are
available for the task. The transparent robots and boxes along the paths
denotetheirfuturelocations.
Fig. 3. A team of 12 robots conducting tasks in the warehouse. Tab. III shows ten representative tasks for the warehouse
Products 1, 2, 3, and 4 are in red, blue, green, and magenta, respectively. environment. A task is considered finished successfully if
The task command is There should be full of product 1
the product distribution on the shelves is the same as the
in shelf 1; full of product 2 in shelf 2; full of
product 3 in shelf 3; and shelf 4 should be empty. ground truth annotated by a human. To estimate the success
The team-level action plan is 0.0: (move-product shelf2 rate, we execute each task ten times from varied initial
shelf3 product3 magnitude6) 1.0: (move-product
robotlocations,explicitlyaccountingforGPT-4o’sstochastic
shelf3 shelf2 product2 magnitude6), ..., 8.0:
(move-product shelf4 shelf2 product2 magnitude4) output.AsshowninTab.III,ourframeworkisabletoachieve
(a)-(d)showthechangesinproductlocationsovertime. a significantly higher success rate meanwhile inducing a
much lower travel cost. Baselines include CoT, SMART-
LLM, and LaMMA-P. We observe that these baselines
succeed only in the first task. This is because in task 1,
the initial product distribution is very close to the desired
distribution: we just need to move two products 1 from
shelf 1 to shelf 3. The baseline frameworks can manage
such “one-step” simple planning. For other tasks, they all
involve moving products back and forth between shelves,
which causes all baselines to fail. These results indicate
that our framework can effectively understand high-level
instructions to coordinate a large number of robots with a
high coordination efficiency. Moreover, in tasks 6 and 7,
we introduce noise to the language commands by using
misspellings. We observe that such small noise can still lead
the framework to fail occasionally. For example, in task 6,
product 3 is written as prodcut3 on purpose and LLMs may
generate a PDDL problem by claiming prodcut3 as a new
product instead of product 3. Similarly, LLMs may claim
shelve4 as a new shelf in the generated PDDL file.
Fig.4. PDDLdomainusedfortheGazebowarehouseenvironment.
Hardware Demonstration. We employ multiple mobile
asshowninFig.3,inwhichateamofrobotsneedstomove ground robots to perform object transfer operations, where
many objects between different shelves based on the input each robot is tasked with pushing boxes to designated
oflanguageinstructions.Weuseblocksofdifferentcolorsto goal locations. Snapshots of a representative experiment at
representdifferentobjectsthatneedtobemoved.Weassume different time frames are shown in Fig. 5.
that the states of robots and objects are known. The team- Limitations.Theproposedframeworkreliesonapre-defined
level planning PDDL domain file is shown in Fig. 4, which team-levelPDDLplanningdomain.Suchadomainencapsu-
focuses on only moving products from one shelf to another lates all possible transitions in the environment and can ef-
shelf without referring to any specific robots. An illustrative fectivelyguideLLMstofindteam-levelsolutions.Currently,
task example is given in the caption of Fig. 3. The PDDL it is still very challenging for LLMs to automatically design
plan, i.e., a sequence of team actions, will be generated and such a domain given a general problem context description.
fedtothetaskallocationandschedulingparttodecidewhich Anotherlimitationisthatweassumetheworldisclosedand
robots should be used to accomplish the team action. The static,asintheclassicAIplanning.Ifthereexistsuncertainty
team can efficiently rearrange a large number of objects. in the environment (e.g., the number and type of objects
TABLEIII
[3] Y.J.Ma,W.Liang,G.Wang,D.-A.Huang,O.Bastani,D.Jayaraman,
STATISTICALRESULTSFROMTABLETOPEXPERIMENTS.
Y. Zhu, L. Fan, and A. Anandkumar, “Eureka: Human-level reward
designviacodinglargelanguagemodels,”inTheTwelfthInternational
Task Successrate(%) Travelcost(m) ConferenceonLearningRepresentations,2024.
[4] B. Yu, H. Kasaei, and M. Cao, “L3mvn: Leveraging large language
ID ours baselines ours(max/avg) baselines modelsforvisualtargetnavigation,”in2023IEEE/RSJInternational
ConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,2023,
1 100 100 28.5/33.0 34.1/40.3 pp.3554–3560.
2 100 0 164.7/141.1 — [5] Y.Tang,W.Yu,J.Tan,H.Zen,A.Faust,andT.Harada,“Saytap:Lan-
3 100 0 151.2/111.6 — guagetoquadrupedallocomotion,”inConferenceonRobotLearning.
4 100 0 321.3/267.1 — PMLR,2023,pp.3556–3570.
[6] S. S. Kannan, V. L. Venkatesh, and B.-C. Min, “Smart-llm: Smart
5 90 0 194.3/167.1 —
multi-agentrobottaskplanningusinglargelanguagemodels,”in2024
6 80 0 201.4/157.4 —
IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems
7 70 0 304.2/271.4 — (IROS). IEEE,2024,pp.12140–12147.
8 100 0 111.6/97.4 — [7] Z. Mandi, S. Jain, and S. Song, “Roco: Dialectic multi-robot col-
9 100 0 221.2/177.4 — laboration with large language models,” in 2024 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2024, pp.
10 100 0 288.3/248.3 —
286–299.
[8] M.Ghallab,D.Nau,andP.Traverso,AutomatedPlanning:theoryand
ID Taskdescription practice. Elsevier,2004.
[9] Y. Liu, L. Palmieri, S. Koch, I. Georgievski, and M. Aiello, “Delta:
1 Thereshouldbe7product1inshelf3. Decomposed efficient long-term robot task planning using large lan-
2 Thereshouldbe3product2inshelf4,5product2inshelf2. guage models,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
3 There should be 10 product1 in shelf3, 9 product1 in shelf2. We andAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,2025,pp.10995–11001.
canonlyuserobot1tomoveproductto[location]oftheshelf1 [10] B.Liu,Y.Jiang,X.Zhang,Q.Liu,S.Zhang,J.Biswas,andP.Stone,
4 There should be 2 product2, 7 product3, 8 product1 in shelf3, 3 “Llm+ p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning
product2,5product3,12product1inshelf2. proficiency,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2304.11477,2023.
[11] Z. Li, X. Wu, H. Du, F. Liu, H. Nghiem, and G. Shi, “A survey of
5 There should be 20 product1 in shelf2, 16 product1 in shelf4,
stateoftheartlargevisionlanguagemodels:Benchmarkevaluations
2 product1 in shelf3. But robot 0 should not be used to move
and challenges,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern
product1fromoneshelftoanother.
Recognition Conference (CVPR) Workshops, June 2025, pp. 1587–
6. Onshelf4,thereoughtabe14prodcut3,2prodcut1,and1prduct2.
1606.
(includemisspellingsbydesign)
[12] Z.Ji,Y.Tiezheng,Y.Xu,N.Lee,E.Ishii,andP.Fung,“Towardsmit-
7. Theyresupposedtobe17prodct1onshelve4,Ithink. igatingllmhallucinationviaselfreflection,”inThe2023Conference
8. shelf4hastenplussevenproduct1 onEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing,2023.
9. shelf2stocksaquartetofproduct2andatrioofproduct3 [13] Z. Li, X. Wu, G. Shi, Y. Qin, H. Du, T. Zhou, D. Manocha, and
J. L. Boyd-Graber, “Videohallu: Evaluating and mitigating multi-
10. shelf4storesadozenproduct3andaquintetofproduct1.
modalhallucinationsonsyntheticvideounderstanding,”arXivpreprint
arXiv:2505.01481,2025.
[14] Z. Li, W. Yu, C. Huang, R. Liu, Z. Liang, F. Liu, J. Che, D. Yu,
are changing or the execution of actions succeeds with a J.Boyd-Graber,H.Mietal.,“Self-rewardingvision-languagemodel
probability),somereplanningmechanismshouldbeincluded viareasoningdecomposition,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2508.19652,2025.
[15] T. Guan, F. Liu, X. Wu, R. Xian, Z. Li, X. Liu, X. Wang, L. Chen,
to close the loop for PIP-LLM.
F.Huang,Y.Yacoobetal.,“Hallusionbench:anadvanceddiagnostic
suiteforentangledlanguagehallucinationandvisualillusioninlarge
VI. CONCLUSION vision-languagemodels,”inProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConference
onComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2024,pp.14375–14385.
[16] D.Bai,I.Singh,D.Traum,andJ.Thomason,“Twostep:Multi-agent
This work presents a hierarchical framework, PIP-LLM,
task planning using classical planners and large language models,”
that integrates LLMs with both PDDL and IP to support arXivpreprintarXiv:2403.17246,2024.
scalable, long-horizon multi-robot task planning. By lever- [17] X. Zhang, H. Qin, F. Wang, Y. Dong, and J. Li, “Lamma-p: Gen-
eralizablemulti-agentlong-horizontaskallocationandplanningwith
aging the complementary strengths of PDDL and IP, and
lm-drivenpddlplanner,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2409.20560,2024.
using LLMs to bridge natural language inputs with formal [18] B.P.GerkeyandM.J.Mataric´,“Aformalanalysisandtaxonomyof
representations, the framework lowers the barrier to entry task allocation in multi-robot systems,” The International journal of
roboticsresearch,vol.23,no.9,pp.939–954,2004.
for non-experts while maintaining the rigor needed for com-
[19] R. Schumann, W. Zhu, W. Feng, T.-J. Fu, S. Riezler, and W. Y.
plex problem-solving. Through comprehensive simulations
Wang, “Velma: verbalization embodiment of llm agents for vision
and hardware validation, we demonstrate the framework’s andlanguagenavigationinstreetview,”inProceedingsoftheThirty-
effectiveness and potential in enabling intuitive deployment
EighthAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2024.
[20] Z. Ravichandran, V. Murali, M. Tzes, G. J. Pappas, and V. Kumar,
ofmulti-robotcoordinationsystemsacrossdiversescenarios.
“Spine:Onlinesemanticplanningformissionswithincompletenatural
The code and dataset will be released after acceptance. language specifications in unstructured environments,” International
ConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),2025.
[21] D. Shah, B. Osinski, B. Ichter, and S. Levine, “LM-nav: Robotic
REFERENCES navigation with large pre-trained models of language, vision, and
action,”in6thAnnualConferenceonRobotLearning,2022.
[1] Y. Rizk, M. Awad, and E. W. Tunstel, “Cooperative heterogeneous [22] A.Tagliabue,K.Kondo,T.Zhao,M.Peterson,C.T.Tewari,andJ.P.
multi-robot systems: A survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), How,“Real:Resilienceandadaptationusinglargelanguagemodelson
vol.52,no.2,pp.1–31,2019. autonomousaerialrobots,”in2024IEEE63rdConferenceonDecision
[2] H. Liu, Y. Zhu, K. Kato, A. Tsukahara, I. Kondo, T. Aoyama, and andControl(CDC),2024,pp.1539–1546.
Y. Hasegawa, “Enhancing the llm-based robot manipulation through [23] R. Sinha, A. Elhafsi, C. Agia, M. Foutter, E. Schmerling, and
human-robot collaboration,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, M.Pavone,“Real-timeanomalydetectionandreactiveplanningwith
vol.9,no.8,pp.6904–6911,2024. largelanguagemodels,”inRobotics:ScienceandSystems(RSS),2024.
[24] S.Xu,X.Luo,Y.Huang,L.Leng,R.Liu,andC.Liu,“Nl2hltl2plan:
Scaling up natural language understanding for multi-robots through
hierarchical temporal logic task specifications,” IEEE Robotics and
AutomationLetters,2025.
[25] Y.Chen,J.Arkin,Y.Zhang,N.Roy,andC.Fan,“Scalablemulti-robot
collaborationwithlargelanguagemodels:Centralizedordecentralized
systems?” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation(ICRA). IEEE,2024,pp.4311–4317.
[26] J.Wang,G.He,andY.Kantaros,“Probabilisticallycorrectlanguage-
based multi-robot planning using conformal prediction,” IEEE
RoboticsandAutomationLetters,2024.
[27] B.Yu,H.Kasaei,andM.Cao,“Co-navgpt:Multi-robotcooperativevi-
sualsemanticnavigationusinglargelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprint
arXiv:2310.07937,2023.
[28] K. Obata, T. Aoki, T. Horii, T. Taniguchi, and T. Nagai, “Lip-llm:
Integrating linear programming and dependency graph with large
language models for multi-robot task planning,” IEEE Robotics and
AutomationLetters,2024.
[29] A. Lykov, M. Dronova, N. Naglov, M. Litvinov, S. Satsevich,
A. Bazhenov, V. Berman, A. Shcherbak, and D. Tsetserukou, “Llm-
mars: Large language model for behavior tree generation and nlp-
enhanced dialogue in multi-agent robot systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.09348,2023.
[30] P. Haslum, N. Lipovetzky, D. Magazzeni, C. Muise, R. Brachman,
F. Rossi, and P. Stone, An introduction to the planning domain
definitionlanguage. Springer,2019,vol.13.
[31] M.FoxandD.Long,“Pddl2.1:Anextensiontopddlforexpressing
temporalplanningdomains,”Journalofartificialintelligenceresearch,
vol.20,pp.61–124,2003.
[32] H. Ravichandar, K. Shaw, and S. Chernova, “Strata: unified frame-
work for task assignments in large teams of heterogeneous agents,”
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, vol. 34, no. 2, p. 38,
2020.
[33] E.Kolve,R.Mottaghi,W.Han,E.VanderBilt,L.Weihs,A.Herrasti,
D. Gordon, Y. Zhu, A. Gupta, and A. Farhadi, “AI2-THOR: An
Interactive3DEnvironmentforVisualAI,”arXiv,2017.
[34] I. Singh, V. Blukis, A. Mousavian, A. Goyal, D. Xu, J. Tremblay,
D.Fox,J.Thomason,andA.Garg,“Progprompt:Generatingsituated
robottaskplansusinglargelanguagemodels,”in2023IEEEInterna-
tionalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,2023,
pp.11523–11530.
