1
Oracle-Guided Masked Contrastive Reinforcement
Learning for Visuomotor Policies
Yuhang Zhang,Student Member, IEEE, Jiaping Xiao,Student Member, IEEE, Chao Yan,Member, IEEE, and
Mir Feroskhan,Member, IEEE
Abstract—A prevailing approach for learning visuomotor poli-
cies is to employ reinforcement learning to map high-dimensional
visual observations directly to action commands. However, the
combination of high-dimensional visual inputs and agile ma-
neuver outputs leads to long-standing challenges, including low
sample efficiency and significant sim-to-real gaps. To address
these issues, we propose Oracle-Guided Masked Contrastive
Reinforcement Learning (OMC-RL), a novel framework designed
to improve the sample efficiency and asymptotic performance of
visuomotor policy learning. OMC-RL explicitly decouples the
learning process into two stages: an upstream representation
learning stage and a downstream policy learning stage. In
the upstream stage, a masked Transformer module is trained
with temporal modeling and contrastive learning to extract
temporally-aware and task-relevant representations from sequen-
tial visual inputs. After training, the learned encoder is frozen and
used to extract visual representations from consecutive frames,
while the Transformer module is discarded. In the downstream
stage, an oracle teacher policy with privileged access to global
state information supervises the agent during early training
to provide informative guidance and accelerate early policy
learning. This guidance is gradually reduced to allow independent
exploration as training progresses. Extensive experiments in
simulated and real-world environments demonstrate that OMC-
RL achieves superior sample efficiency and asymptotic policy
performance, while also improving generalization across diverse
and perceptually complex scenarios.
Index Terms—autonomous robot, visuomotor policy, reinforce-
ment learning, masked contrastive learning, learning-by-cheating
I. INTRODUCTION
First-person-view navigation for autonomous robots rep-
resents a challenging task that emulates human behavioral
paradigms [1], with wide-ranging applications across critical
domains, including autonomous driving [2], field exploration
[3], and urban surveillance [4]. Skilled human operators
demonstrate the ability to perform agile and precise maneuvers
using only delayed and occasionally occluded visual feed-
back from onboard monocular cameras, without compromising
safety. This remarkable capability is attributed to the human
brain’s ability to distill abstract perceptual signals into com-
pact, low-dimensional representations that serve as internal
Y . Zhang, J. Xiao, and M. Feroskhan are with the School of Me-
chanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological Univer-
sity, Singapore 639798, Singapore (e-mail: yuhang004@e.ntu.edu.sg; jiap-
ing001@e.ntu.edu.sg; mir.feroskhan@ntu.edu.sg). C. Yan is with the College
of Automation Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronau-
tics, Nanjing, 211106, China (e-mail: yanchao@nuaa.edu.cn).(Corresponding
authors: Mir Feroskhan and Chao Yan.)
Project materials and supplementary information are available at: https:
//zzzzzyh111.github.io/OMC-RL-Website/.
Sample SetOracle- Guided 
Policy Distillation
Matrix
MultiplicationPositive
PairsNegative
Pairs
Masked
InputOracle
Teacher
Agent(a) Vanilla Teacher-Student Policy Learning
Aggregated Set1 Aggregated Set2
Aggregated- Aggregated 
Alignment
(b) Vanilla Contrastive Learning
Masked Setm Sample Set
Oracle- Guided 
Original -Masked Alignment
(c) Oracle-Guided Masked Contrastive Learning
Fig. 1: Illustration of different learning paradigms for goal-
conditioned representation and policy learning. (a) In vanilla
teacher-student policy learning, the agent learns from an oracle
teacher via policy distillation to better identify and reach the
target through supervised imitation. (b) In vanilla contrastive
learning, given an observation setH, positive pairs (red
arrows) formed between aggregated features are aligned, while
all other negatives (blue arrows) are pushed apart. (c) Oracle-
guided masked contrastive learning (ours) combines masked
contrastive representation learning with oracle-supervised pol-
icy learning to jointly improve both feature encoding and
downstream decision-making.
interpretations for guiding action. Given the complexity and
unstructured nature of real-world environments, autonomous
robotic systems must be equipped with a feature extractor
capable of filtering out noise and redundancy from high-
dimensional visual feeds, and extracting effective representa-arXiv:2510.05692v1  [cs.RO]  7 Oct 2025
2
tions for decision-making.
Traditional methods typically follow a mapping–planning
paradigm [5], including Simultaneous Localization and Map-
ping (SLAM) [6] and Structure from Motion (SfM) [7].
These pipelines heavily rely on sophisticated hand-crafted
features for keypoint detection and matching. Although effec-
tive, their reliance on feature engineering limits flexibility and
incurs high computational cost. Moreover, their performance
degrades significantly in textureless or visually ambiguous
environments. Deep learning (DL) [8] offers an alternative
paradigm by leveraging deep neural networks (DNNs) to
extract task-relevant features directly from raw sensory ob-
servations and map them to action commands. In contrast
to heuristic feature engineering, DNN-based encoders extract
representations directly from data, allowing the model to adapt
to diverse input distributions without manual intervention.
However, training visuomotor policies for autonomous robot
navigation with DL often demands expert-annotated action
datasets as supervision signals, which are expensive to collect,
particularly in real-world settings [9].
Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved expert-
level performance, even exceeding human professionals in
domains such as Go [10], video games [11], and Mahjong
[12]. By integrating RL algorithms with high-capacity DNNs,
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is increasingly adopted to
address complex robotic perception and control tasks [13]–
[15]. Specifically, in the domain of autonomous robot navi-
gation where visuomotor policies take a sequence of image
frames as input, existing DRL algorithms suffer from two
major limitations: (i)the curse of dimensionality. The input
data is extremely high-dimensional, making it difficult for
the policy network to directly learn effective mappings from
observations to actions, which often leads to unstable learning
dynamics and poor generalization; (ii)sample inefficiency.
Due to the trial-and-error nature of RL and the complexity
of visual navigation tasks, training typically requires a large
number of rollout trajectories, reflecting low sample efficiency
and incurring substantial computational cost. These limitations
jointly affect both the efficiency and effectiveness of DRL
algorithms.
To address the aforementioned challenges, recent studies
have explored representation learning, which trains a feature
encoder to compress high-dimensional visual inputs into com-
pact representations before feeding them into the downstream
policy network. However, it remains non-trivial to design
representation learning methods that are both effective and
sample-efficient in DRL settings. Existing approaches gener-
ally fall into two categories: one category introduces auxiliary
self-supervised losses to guide encoder learning [16]–[18],
and the other learns a world model that captures transition
dynamics and enables planning in the latent space [19]–[21].
As a prominent self-supervised strategy, contrastive learning
has recently emerged as a powerful tool in representation
learning [22]–[24]. Unlike class-level supervised learning ap-
proaches, it operates at the instance level and is primarily
designed to learn generalizable representations through pretext
tasks. Specifically, during pre-training, each input image is
subjected to data augmentation techniques such as randomcropping or color jittering, resulting in two distinct views
of the same instance. These views are then passed through
a shared feature encoder to produce latent representations.
The fundamental objective of contrastive learning is to draw
representations of the same instance closer in the feature
space while enforcing dissimilarity with the rest in the batch,
typically enforced via a contrastive loss [22]. Encouraged by
its notable performance in the computer vision domain, con-
trastive learning has been extended to RL settings, commonly
as an auxiliary loss [16], [25]. A prominent example is CURL
[25], which stands for contrastive unsupervised representations
for RL. It demonstrates that pixel-based RL can rival the
performance of state-based RL counterparts.
Further explorations have applied contrastive learning to
autonomous robot navigation tasks [26]–[28], where it has
shown promise in improving robustness to visual interference
and enhancing sample efficiency. Nonetheless, most existing
approaches neglect the strong temporal correlations across
consecutive frames. In visuomotor policy learning, understand-
ing such temporal coherence is crucial. Intuitively, a represen-
tation encoder should not only process the current observation
accurately, but also encode contextual relationships across
adjacent frames. In addition, jointly optimizing the encoder
and policy network often leads to domain-specific overfitting,
thereby hindering generalization to unseen environments.
Encouraged by prior advances, this paper proposes a
novel framework named oracle-guided masked contrastive RL
(OMC-RL) to enhance the sample efficiency and asymptotic
performance of visuomotor policy learning. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, OMC-RL differs from vanilla teacher-student pol-
icy learning and contrastive learning by integrating masked
temporal contrastive learning with oracle-guided supervision,
leading to joint improvements in both feature encoding and
downstream decision-making. Specifically, we decouple the
feature encoder from the RL policy to allow stable rep-
resentation learning and independent control over encoder
optimization. For upstream feature extraction, unlike previ-
ous approaches that utilize DNNs as pixel encoders [25],
we incorporate a Transformer encoder [29] as an auxiliary
module to model the temporal correlation across sequential
observations. Specifically, the latent representations of certain
frames are randomly masked and subsequently reconstructed
by the Transformer module, encouraging the model to capture
temporally consistent representations. A contrastive loss is
subsequently designed to jointly train both the DNN encoder
and Transformer, encouraging the reconstructed features to be
similar to the unmasked ones while distinct from others. For
downstream policy learning, we introduce an oracle teacher
with privileged access to complete environment states, which
is pretrained to generate expert actions. A Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence loss is designed between the oracle and agent
policies to guide policy learning. We conduct extensive experi-
ments in simulated and real-world environments to validate the
effectiveness of OMC-RL. Simulation experiments show that
OMC-RL consistently outperforms all learning- and planning-
based baselines across diverse scenarios. Moreover, real-world
in-flight experiments demonstrate that OMC-RL outperforms
the state-of-the-art baseline, further validating the advantages
3
of the proposed framework in practical deployment.
The contributions of this paper are summarized below.
1) We propose a masked contrastive learning method for
robot navigation to address the curse of dimensionality
and sample inefficiency arising from high-dimensional
visual inputs. The encoder is decoupled from the policy
network to enable stable and task-agnostic representation
learning. By reconstructing masked latent features from
sequential inputs, the method improves temporal aware-
ness and enhances robustness to domain shift.
2) We introduce an oracle-guided visuomotor policy learn-
ing framework, where an expert policy with privileged
access to global environment states serves as a training-
time oracle. By developing a learning-by-cheating strat-
egy based on KL divergence, the agent is empowered
to leverage dense supervision from the oracle, thereby
improving sample efficiency and asymptotic performance.
3) We demonstrate that OMC-RL achieves strong simula-
tion performance compared with various baselines. More
importantly, we show that it surpasses the state-of-the-art
baseline in real-world in-flight experiments and maintains
robust performance under diverse visual disturbances.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II reviews prior work on visuomotor policy learning, represen-
tation learning for RL, and sample-efficient RL. Section III
introduces the preliminaries and formalizes the problem. Sec-
tion IV details the methodology of the proposed framework.
Section V describes the experimental setup for evaluating the
proposed method. Section VI presents the results and analysis
in simulation and physical environments. Finally, Section VII
concludes the paper and outlines future research directions.
II. RELATEDWORK
This section reviews related work in three key areas: vi-
suomotor policy learning from high-dimensional observations,
representation learning for RL, and methods for improving
sample efficiency in RL.
A. Visuomotor Policy Learning
At the core of visuomotor policy learning lies the challenge
of approximating the mapping from high-dimensional visual
observations to control actions. This problem has been widely
addressed using DL [9], [30], [31], where large-scale real-
world datasets, such as crash records [30] or urban traffic
footage [9], are used to train a DNN to perform this map-
ping from pixel-level inputs to action commands. However,
these DL-based approaches suffer from limited generalization
capacity and brittleness to distributional shifts, making them
highly sensitive to unseen scenarios.
To overcome these drawbacks, DRL [13], [32]–[35] has
emerged as an alternative, offering a trial-and-error learning
paradigm that enables agents to generalize through interaction.
Thanks to its exploratory nature and ability to learn from feed-
back rewards, DRL exhibits greater robustness when deployed
in previously unseen environments. For instance, Kaufmann et
al. [13] proposed a DRL-based drone racing framework that
learns agile visuomotor control policies directly from raw pixelinput, achieving performance surpassing champions. Zhang et
al. [32] further enhanced DRL for visuomotor learning by
introducing differentiable physics, enabling more efficient and
accurate policy optimization through low-variance gradients.
Distinct from previous efforts that directly optimize over
raw pixels, our approach focuses on extracting compact and
task-relevant representations from high-dimensional sequential
visual inputs. This design aims to improve training efficiency
and enable better transferability, especially under challenging
real-world conditions.
B. Representation Learning for RL
Learning effective representations is crucial for visual RL
tasks. Existing approaches can be broadly categorized into two
types: auxiliary self-supervised learning [16]–[18] and latent
world modeling for planning [19]–[21]. Our work comple-
ments the first category.
Among auxiliary self-supervised methods, one strategy is
pixel-level reconstruction [18], [36], [37], where the encoder
is trained to reconstruct raw input observations, thereby en-
couraging the extraction of informative features that preserve
task-relevant information. Another strategy is instance-level
contrastive learning [26]–[28], [38], [39], which aims to pro-
duce similar representations for positive pairs and dissimilar
ones for negatives, thereby enhancing discriminative capacity.
For instance, Xing et al. [27] introduced an adaptive multi-
pair contrastive learning method into DRL for visuomotor
policy learning. Positive pairs were constructed from spatially
adjacent frames along the flight track, while distant frames
were treated as negatives, enabling local continuity in the
learned representation. Zhang et al. [26] further proposed a
cross-modal contrastive learning approach to improve domain
transfer of visuomotor policies. The contrastive objective was
designed to extract depth-aware features from monocular
images by aligning RGB–depth pairs, resulting in consistent
navigation performance under visual interference and environ-
mental changes.
Different from prior works that utilize multi-layer percep-
trons or DNNs to interpret pixels, our work extends instance-
level contrastive learning by incorporating Transformer [29]
as a powerful sequential modeling backbone to process con-
secutive frames. It allows the encoder to model temporal
dependencies explicitly, which enhances context understanding
and supports temporally consistent decision making.
C. Sample-Efficient RL
Improving sample efficiency remains a long-standing chal-
lenge in visual RL, particularly in complex real-world robotics
tasks such as visuomotor policy learning. Low sample effi-
ciency often leads to prohibitive training time, excessive trial-
and-error interactions, and poor transferability [40].
Existing methods can be broadly categorized into two direc-
tions: input-level optimization [25], [41], [42] and policy-level
guidance [1], [33], [43], [44]. The former direction focuses
on reducing the burden of policy optimization by learning
low-dimensional, compact visual representations from high-
dimensional observations (e.g., CURL [25]). These approaches
4
align with representation learning techniques discussed in the
previous section. Moreover, recent efforts have incorporated
data augmentation [41], [42] into the RL pipeline, improving
generalization from limited data and enhancing resilience to
visual variations. The latter direction introduces prior demon-
strations to assist policy learning. Notable progress has been
made in methods like deep Q-learning from demonstrations
(DQfD) [43], where the replay buffer is enriched with prior
demonstrations to accelerate early-stage learning. Beyond
fixed demonstrations, recent studies [1], [33], [44] explore
the use of adaptive guidance by dynamically updating prior
policies during training. For instance, Wu et al. [1] proposed
a human-guided RL framework for autonomous navigation,
where human feedback is used to interactively update a prior
policy. This strategy improved sample efficiency by enabling
online correction without extensive manual demonstrations.
Zhang et al. [33] introduced a non-expert policy-guided DRL
framework, in which a suboptimal planner provided reference
actions in the early training stage. The guidance was gradually
decayed as train progressed to allow for independent explo-
ration, resulting in enhanced data efficiency with reduced cost.
In contrast to these methods, our work combines compact
representation learning with privileged policy guidance in
a unified framework, improving sample efficiency and real-
world applicability under constrained perception.
III. PRELIMINARIES ANDPROBLEMFORMULATION
This section presents the preliminaries of the proposed
framework, including the problem formulation and the con-
trastive learning objective for visuomotor policy learning.
A. Problem Formulation
Given that visuomotor policy learning for robots is inher-
ently subject to partial observability due to the limited field of
view of the onboard monocular camera, we formulate the task
as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP).
The problem is defined by the tuple(O,A,P,R, γ), where
Odenotes the observation space of high-dimensional image
collections captured by the camera, andAis the action
space available to the agent. At each timestept, the agent
observes an imageo t∈ Oand executes a corresponding
actiona t∈ A, which jointly determine the evolution of
its interaction with the environment. The transition dynamics
modelPspecifies the conditional distribution over the next
observationo t+1given the current inputo tand actiona t, that
is,P= Pr(o t+1|ot, at). The reward function is defined as
R:O × A 7→R, which maps an observation-action pair
(ot, at)to a scalar reward,i.e.,r t=R(o t, at)∈R. Finally,
γ∈(0,1]denotes the discount factor that balances short-term
and long-term rewards.
In DRL, DNNs are employed to process high-dimensional
observations and learn sequential decision-making policies
through trial-and-error interactions. Since the agent can-
not directly access the underlying environment states t,
it must instead utilize a history of recent visual obser-
vations to ensure informative action execution. Leth t=
(ot−L+1 , ot−L+2 , . . . , o t)denote this temporal history. Toextract actionable representations from raw inputs, we adopt
a two-stage architecture: a DNN encoderf θ, parameterized
byθ, first maps the observation historyh tinto a compact
latent feature, which is then passed to a policy network
πψ, parameterized byψ, to generate the control action,i.e.,
at=π ψ(fθ(ht)). The learning objective is to obtain an
optimal visuomotor policyπ∗
ψ:fθ(ht)7→ Athat maximizes
the expected cumulative discounted reward,E[P∞
t=0γtrt].
During deployment, the agent follows the learned policy
π∗
ψ= arg max πψEo∼P, a∼π ψ[R(o, a)], where decisions are
made iteratively by encoding the current observation history
htand sampling actions from the policy.
B. Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning is a self-supervised representation
learning paradigm that formulates instance-level discrimina-
tion as a classification task: each sample is treated as its own
class and must be distinguished from all other instances in
the dataset, without requiring any manual annotations. Given a
batch of RGB imagesI={I 1,I2, . . . ,I N}sampled from the
replay buffer, each imageI i∈ I, is processed by two DNN
encoders: a query encoderf qand a key encoderf k. These
encoders map the inputs into a shared latent space, producing
embeddingsq i=f q(Ii)andk i=f k(Ii). The learning
objective encourages the representation of each positive pair
(qi, ki)to be similar, while ensuring dissimilarity to the
remaining keys inK\{k i}. This is achieved using the InfoNCE
loss [25]:
LInfoNCE =−E I"
logexp(sim(q i, ki)/τ)PN
j=1exp(sim(q i, kj)/τ)#
,(1)
where sim(·,·)denotes a similarity metric (e.g., cosine sim-
ilarity), andτis a temperature hyperparameter. To enhance
temporal sensitivity, we adopt a sequence-based encoding
scheme whereLvisual observations are temporally stacked
and encoded into a unified latent representation before apply-
ing the contrastive loss. This promotes the learning of tem-
porally consistent features that are beneficial for downstream
visuomotor policy learning.
IV. METHODOLOGY
This section details the proposed framework, including
masked contrastive learning, oracle policy learning, and the
two-stage visuomotor policy training procedure.
A. Overview
We present a comprehensive framework for learning robust
visuomotor policies under partial observability, formulated as
a two-stage learning process. The full training pipeline is
illustrated in Fig. 2. Specifically, we decouple the visuomotor
policy learning into two complementary components: (i) an
upstream representation learning module based on masked
contrastive learning, which extracts informative latent features
from high-dimensional visual observations; and (ii) a down-
stream policy learning module based on a learning-by-cheating
strategy, guided by privileged supervision from an oracle
5
Observation TObservation 2Observation 1
Masked RGB Input
Observation TObservation 2
Observation 1RGB Input
CNN 
Encoderfθ
Projection
Layerϕ
With Gradient
Frozen
Positional Embedding
Element -Wide Addition
Mask
RGB Embedding
Masked RGB Embedding
SGStop GradientEMA
EncoderkfθCNN Encoder fθ
Projection Layerϕ
CNN EncoderOracle Policy (| )o
tasψπ
] [, ,,t tt t p∆ vωθ()] [, ,,g
t tt t p∆ vωθ
( ) (1 )kk mmθθθ←⋅ +− ⋅ SG
( ) (1 )kk mmωωω←⋅ +− ⋅ SG
Agent Policy (| )tasψπ′KL()o
ψψππ KL-divergenceOracle Policy Learning Learning -by-Cheating
Agent Policy Network Oracle Policy Network
Auxiliary Transformer Moduleξ Auxiliary
Module
EMA 
Projectionkϕξ
cl( ;,,)θϕξ
RGB Input Depth InputDownstream Policy LearningUpstream Masked Contrastive Representation Learning
Layer Norm
Self Attention
Layer Norm
Fig. 2: The framework of OMC-RL. (a) Upstream Masked Contrastive Representation Learning: A masked contrastive learning
module is used to learn compact and task-relevant visual representations from sequential RGB inputs. The masked and original
inputs are processed through CNN encoders and projection layers, while the masked branch is further processed by an auxiliary
transformer module to compute the contrastive lossL cl. After training, the CNN encoder is frozen and the transformer module is
discarded. (b) Downstream Oracle-Guided Policy Learning: An oracle teacher policy is first trained using privileged depth inputs
and full-state information, providing expert action distributions for downstream supervision. This oracle network supervises the
student policy through a learning-by-cheating strategy. Specifically, the agent policy is optimized via KL-divergence against
the oracle policy distribution to enable efficient visuomotor policy learning.
teacher policy. In the following subsections, the upstream rep-
resentation learning is detailed in Section IV-B, and the down-
stream policy learning is presented in Section IV-C, including
the oracle teacher policy and the learning-by-cheating strategy.
The complete algorithm and the theoretical justification are
summarized in Section IV-D.
B. Upstream Masked Contrastive Representation Learning
To extract generalizable visual features, we decouple rep-
resentation learning from policy optimization in RL [45],
allowing the encoder to be trained via unsupervised objectives
independently of reward signals. However, when decoupling is
applied directly, RL algorithms typically sample uncorrelated
mini-batches for policy optimization and discard collected
trajectories after each update. This process disrupts the in-
herent temporal coherence among observations, potentially
hindering stable learning. However, for visuomotor agents,
sequential context is critical for informative decision-making
due to the partially observable nature of image inputs. To
address this, we store full trajectories and exploit the temporal
continuity embedded in these sequences to enhance repre-
sentation learning. Motivated by the success of Transformer
architectures in modeling sequence data across domains suchas translation [46], [47], we propose a masked contrastive
learning framework based on the Transformer architecture to
learn temporally consistent representations.
Specifically, at each iteration, a stack ofLconsecutive
imagesh t∈ H, whereHrepresents the set of allh t, is
first processed by the DNN encoderf θ:H 7→Rdto obtain
a compactd-dimensional latent representationz t=fθ(ht).
Unlike conventional approaches such as CURL [25], which
directly calculates the contrastive loss on these latent features,
we introduce an auxiliary transformation pipeline to further
process the representation. Specifically, the representationz tis
first passed through a non-linear projection moduleφ, and then
encoded by a Transformer moduleξto jointly model temporal
dependencies and contextual structure. The final output from
ξ(φ(z t))is used as the anchor embedding for contrastive
learning. Subsequently, we will proceed to detail the auxiliary
architecture, including data collection and model structure.
Data Collection.We collect our training dataset by record-
ing temporally ordered visual observations from drone flights
under manual control, random exploration, and pretrained
policies. These sequences are saved chronologically and used
for offline training. At each training step, we sampleT
sequential observations denoted byH= (h 1, h2, . . . , h T)
6
from the dataset. To enable masked representation learning
as described in [46], we define a binary masking vector
M= (M 1, M2, . . . , M T)∈ {0,1}T, where eachM iis
independently sampled from a Bernoulli distribution with
masking probabilityϱ m∈[0,1]. IfM i= 1, the correspond-
ing inputh iis altered via one of the following stochastic
operations: with probability80%,h iis replaced with a zero
tensor; with probability10%, it is substituted with a randomly
sampled inputh jfrom the dataset wherej̸=i; and with
probability10%, it remains the same. We denote the processed
observation ashm
i, and obtain the final masked input via:
¯hm
i=M i·hm
i+(1−M i)·hi. The masked sequence is defined
asHm= (¯hm
1,¯hm
2, . . . , ¯hm
T)and passed through the encoder
fθto generate latent embeddings ˆZ= (z 1, z2, . . . , z T), where
zi=fθ(¯hm
i),¯hm
i∈ Hm.
Model Structure.We adopt a lightweight DNN encoderf θ
to extract compact features from consecutive observations. The
encoder consists of two convolutional layers with 32 output
channels: the first uses a3×3kernel with stride 2 for spatial
downsampling, and the second applies a3×3kernel with
stride 1 for feature refinement. Each convolutional layer is
followed by aReLUactivation. The output is then flattened
and passed through a fully connected layer, followed by layer
normalization and atanhactivation, producing a boundedd-
dimensional latent representation.
We introduce a projection moduleφthat applies a non-
linear transformation to the latent features produced by the
encoder before contrastive loss computation. This nonlinear
mapping aims to project the features into a space where
they are more linearly separable for the contrastive objective
[22]. The module operates on the masked feature sequence
ˆZ= (z 1, z2, . . . , z T). Eachz iis passed through a two-layer
multilayer perceptron withReLUactivation. Specifically, we
compute the projected representation as follows:
φ(zi) =W(2)·ReLU(W(1)zi+b(1)) +b(2),(2)
wherez i∈ˆZ,W(1), W(2)andb(1), b(2)are learnable weights
and biases. The resulting transformed sequence ˆZ(0)=
(φ(z 1), . . . , φ(z T))is subsequently passed to the Transformer
encoder for temporal modeling.
To reconstruct the masked latent representations rather than
raw pixel observations, we employ a Transformer encoder
moduleξthat refines the partially corrupted embeddings
φ(zi)∈ˆZ(0)into temporally contextualized representations.
The architecture ofξfollows the encoder-only architecture of
the standard Transformer [29] with single-head attention and
is composed ofLidentical blocks. Each block contains a self-
attention layerAttn(·)and a feedforward transformationF(·),
equipped with residual connections and layer normalization.
Prior to entering the first block, positional encodings are
added to each token to incorporate sequential structure, i.e.,
˜zi=φ(z i) +p i, wherep idenotes the sinusoidal positional
embedding following the standard Transformer setting. At
each blockl∈ {1, . . . , L}, the attention mechanism operates
on the entire input sequence from the previous block to
output ˜Z(l)= (˜z(l)
1, . . . ,˜z(l)
T), where˜z(l)
iis the result of
self-attention at positioniin layerl. Query, key, and valuevectors are computed asq(l)
i=W(l)
Q˜z(l−1)
i ,k(l)
j=W(l)
K˜z(l−1)
j ,
andv(l)
j=W(l)
V˜z(l−1)
j , whereW(l)
Q, W(l)
K, W(l)
Vare learnable
projection matrices for thel-th block. Here,˜z(l)
ican be
computed as follows:
˜z(l)
i= Attn(˜z(l−1)
i,˜Z(l−1)) =TX
j=1α(l)
ijv(l)
j,
α(l)
ij=exp
(q(l)
i)⊤k(l)
j/√
d
PT
j′=1exp
(q(l)
i)⊤k(l)
j′/√
d.(3)
Then, the output˜z(l)
iis passed throughF(·)consisting of
a two-layer MLP with ReLU activation:
z(l)
i=F(˜z(l)
i) =W(l)
2·ReLU(W(l)
1˜z(l)
i+b(l)
1) +b(l)
2,(4)
where allW(l)
1, W(l)
2andb(l)
1, b(l)
2are learnable parameters.
By repeating the aforementioned operations forLtimes, we
obtain the final output sequenceZ(L)= (z(L)
1, z(L)
2, . . . , z(L)
T),
which serves as the input to the contrastive learning objective.
Training Procedure.Here we detail the optimization pro-
cedure off θ,φ, andξ. Specifically, we employ a query
encoderf θand a key encoderf θkwith identical architec-
ture but separate parameters, along with projection heads
φandφ kof the same configuration. The query embed-
dingsq iare obtained from the masked representationsZ(L)
produced by the Transformer moduleξ, while the key set
K= (k 1, k2, . . . , k T)is constructed from the non-masked
inputsH, wherek i=φk(fθk(hi)),h i∈ H. The key network
parameters are updated using a momentum update rule [25]:
both the encoder parametersθ kand the projector parameters
ωkofφ kare updated asθ k←m·SG(θ) + (1−m)·θ k
andω k←m·SG(ω) + (1−m)·ω k, wherem∈[0,1]is
the momentum coefficient andSG(·)denotes the stop-gradient
operation [48].
The contrastive loss is computed over the masked posi-
tions, encouraging each reconstructed representationq i(i.e.,
z(L)
i∈Z(L)) to be similar to its corresponding positive key
kiwhile dissimilar to the rest of the batch. This formulation
aims to enforce the encoderf θto preserve the most repre-
sentative and semantically relevant features in the original
pixel space. Only by retaining globally consistent patterns can
the model accurately reconstruct missing information from
partially observed inputs. Note that the loss in OMC-RL
follows the same InfoNCE formulation as in Eq. (1), with
the only difference thatq iandk iare derived from masked
reconstruction. Formally, the loss is defined as:
Lcl(H;θ, φ, ξ) =−E qi"
Mi·logexp (sim(q i, ki)/τ)PT
j=1exp (sim(q i, kj)/τ)#
.
(5)
After training, we discardξand retain onlyf θandφ,
whose parameters are frozen and used as the visual backbone
for downstream RL policy optimization, thereby reducing
computational overhead.
7
C. Downstream Oracle-Guided Policy Learning
Oracle Policy Learning.To provide additional guidance
for training the visuomotor policy, we first pretrain an oracle
teacher policy, denoted asπo
ψ. The oracle teacherπo
ψis a state-
based policy with access to the full global state information
st, which is defined as follows:
st= 
Id
t,vt,ωt,θt,∆p t
,(6)
whereId
t={Id
t−L+1 ,Id
t−L+2 , . . . ,Id
t}denotes a sequence of
depth images withId
t∈RH×W,vt∈R3andω t∈R3are
drone’s linear and angular velocities, respectively,θ t∈R3
represents the drone’s orientation, and∆p t∈R6represents
the relative positions between the drone and surrounding
objects, including obstacles and the goal. The oracle teacher
πo
ψmaps this global states tto a control commandu tas:
πo
ψ:st7→u t∈R3, whereu t= (v x, vy, ωz)includes the
linear velocities in thexandydirections and the angular
velocity around thez-axis.
The network architecture ofπo
ψconsists of a visual encoder
fo
θfollowed by a fully-connected layerφo. The encoder
fo
θ:Id
t7→Rdmaps the sequential depth imagesId
tinto
ad-dimensional feature representationzd
t=fo
θ(Id
t). This
embedding is then concatenated with the remaining state
information and passed into the fully connected moduleφoto
produce the control output:uo
t=φo 
zd
t;vt;ωt; ∆p t
. The
oracle teacherπo
ψcan be trained using various model-free RL
algorithms [49]–[51]. In this work, we adopt Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) [51] for its stability and effectiveness in
continuous control tasks, which are critical properties for agile
and precise visuomotor policy learning. After training, it serves
as guidance for subsequent visuomotor policy learning via a
learning-by-cheating strategy.
Learning-by-Cheating Strategy.After upstream represen-
tation learning, the frozenf θandφare used to process sequen-
tial RGB inputs for downstream RL policy learning. Given
the current observation historyh tcomposed ofLstacked
RGB frames, thed-dimensional latent visual representation
is computed as:z t=φ(f θ(ht)), z t∈Rd. Unlike the
oracle teacher policyπo
ψ, which operates on the privileged
states t= (Id
t,vt,ωt,θt,∆p t), the RL policyπ ψis trained
using a partial observationo t= (z t,vt,ωt,θt,∆p(g)
t), where
∆p(g)
t∈R3represents the relative position between the agent
and the goal. The control output is then predicted by passing
otthrough the actor networkϕ a:ut=ϕa(ot).
We adopt PPO [51] as the RL algorithm to optimizeπ ψ.
Given a trajectoryTsampled from rollouts, the loss is defined
as:
Lrl(T;ϕ a, ϕc) =−E th
min
rtˆAt,clip(r t,1−ϵ,1 +ϵ) ˆAti
+Et
V(ot)−ˆVt2
,
(7)
whereϕ aandϕ care the parameters of the actor and critic
networks, respectively,tindexes timesteps sampled fromT,
rtdenotes the probability ratio between the new and old
policies, ˆAtis the estimated advantage,V(o t)is the predictedstate value, and ˆVtis the Monte Carlo return computed from
observed rewards.
To leverage the oracle teacher policyπo
ψfor guiding the
training, we adopt the learning-by-cheating paradigm, in which
the agent is supervised by an oracle policy that has privileged
access to full-state information unavailable during deploy-
ment. This allows for stronger and more informative guidance
throughout training. Specifically, we introduce an additional
KL-divergence term between the action distributions ofπ ψand
πo
ψ. Letπ ψ(·|ot)andπo
ψ(·|st)denote the stochastic policies,
the KL divergence is defined as:
DKL(πo
ψ∥πψ) =E a∼πo
ψ(·|st)
logπo
ψ(a|st)
πψ(a|ot)
,(8)
which penalizes deviations from the oracle under the privi-
leged state distribution. To ensure stability, this term is scaled
by a decaying coefficientαand a fixed scaling constantβ
following [33], leading to the final RL policy objective:
Lπψ(T;ϕ a, ϕc) = (1−α)L rl(T;ϕ a, ϕc) +αβD KL(πo
ψ∥πψ).
(9)
The coefficientαdecays over time to allow the learned
policy to gradually diverge from the oracle and explore its
own strategies. Finally, the overall learning objective of our
framework is formulated as:
min
θ,φ,ξ,ϕ a,ϕcLcl(H;θ, φ, ξ) +L πψ(T;ϕ a, ϕc).(10)
D. Summary and Theoretical Justification
Algorithm Summary.We summarize the overall training
pipeline of OMC-RL in Algorithm 1, which integrates up-
stream masked contrastive representation learning and down-
stream policy learning under oracle guidance. In the first
stage, the agent learns robust visual representations through
masked contrastive learning. In the second stage, a visuomotor
policy is optimized using a learning-by-cheating strategy, with
supervision provided by an oracle teacher policy that has
access to privileged information.
Theoretical Justification.The objective of masked con-
trastive learning is to discover a representation spaceZ
that captures the structural granularity and alignment among
samples. Assuming the existence of an optimal representation
Z⋆, we can define the expected population risk underZ⋆as:
RE(θ, φ, ξ) =E hi[Lcl(hi, z⋆
i;θ, φ, ξ)].(11)
In practice, the corresponding empirical risk overNsamples
is given by:
ˆR(θ, φ, ξ) =1
NNX
i=1Lcl(hi, z⋆
i;θ, φ, ξ).(12)
Theorem 1.The generalization error of masked contrastive
learning is bounded by the discrepancy between the learned
representation spaceZand the optimal representation space
Z⋆, i.e.,
dz=1
nnX
i=1∥zi−z⋆
i∥2.(13)
8
Algorithm 1:Training Pipeline of OMC-RL
Input:RGB sequence datasetH, rollout trajectoryT,
and oracle teacherπo
ψ
Output:Optimized visuomotor policyπ ψ
1// Upstream Training
2foreachiterationdo
3Sample sequenceH= (h 1, . . . , h T)
4Sample maskM∼Bernoulli(ϱ m)
5ConstructHm= (¯hm
1, . . . , ¯hm
T)
6Encode:z i=fθ(¯hm
i),q i=ξ(φ(z i))
7Compute keys:k j=φk(fθk(hj)), h j∈ H
8ComputeL cl(H;θ, φ, ξ)via Eq. (5)
9θ←θ−λ θ∇θLcl(H;θ, φ, ξ)
10φ←φ−λ φ∇φLcl(H;θ, φ, ξ)
11ξ←ξ−λ ξ∇ξLcl(H;θ, φ, ξ)
12θ k←m·SG(θ) + (1−m)·θ k
13ω k←m·SG(ω) + (1−m)·ω k
14end
15// Downstream Training
16Freezef θandφ, discardξ
17foreachiterationdo
18Sample rollout trajectory
T={s t, ot,ut,uo
t, rt}T
t=1
19ComputeL rl(T;ϕ a, ϕc)via Eq. (7)
20ComputeD KL(πo
ψ∥πψ)via Eq. (8)
21ComputeL πψ(T;ϕ a, ϕc)via Eq. (9)
22ϕ a←ϕ a−λϕa∇ϕaLπψ(T;ϕ a, ϕc)
23ϕ c←ϕ c−λϕc∇ϕcLπψ(T;ϕ a, ϕc)
24end
Proof.Assume the contrastive lossL cl(hi, z⋆
i;θ, φ, ξ)is
bounded in[a, b]and isλ-Lipschitz continuous with respect
tozi. LetN E,NP, andN Tdenote the covering numbers of
the encoder, projection head, and transformer module spaces,
respectively. Then, with probability at least1−δ, we have:
|RE(θ, φ, ξ)−R(θ, φ, ξ)| ≤ |R E(θ, φ, ξ)− ˆR(θ, φ, ξ)|| {z }
Hoeffding’s inequality
+|ˆR(θ, φ, ξ)−R(θ, φ, ξ)|| {z }
Lipschitz continuous
≤ |a−b|r
log(2N E· NP· NT/δ)
2n
+λ·1
nnX
i=1∥zi−z⋆
i∥2.
Based on Theorem 1, the generalization error of masked
contrastive learning can be effectively reduced when the
learned representation spaceZbetter approximates the optimal
spaceZ⋆. By employing a masking strategy, OMC-RL encour-
ages the model to capture the intrinsic structure of the data,
thus providing a theoretical justification for its effectiveness.
(a) Box environment
 (b) Furniture environment
(c) Barrier environment
 (d) Tree environment
Fig. 3: Simulation environments with increasing complexity
used to evaluate OMC-RL.
V. EXPERIMENTALSETUP
This section details the experimental setup for evaluating
OMC-RL. We describe the simulation environments, eval-
uation metrics, baseline methods, and key implementation
configurations used throughout our experiments.
A. Simulation Setup
We construct our simulation environments in Unity to
systematically evaluate the performance and generalization
capability of our proposed method under diverse conditions.
To this end, we design four distinct scenarios with various
complexities, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The first is a structured
indoor environment populated with identical box-shaped ob-
stacles. The second is a furniture-filled indoor scene containing
a variety of objects with different shapes, sizes, and materials.
The third scenario introduces additional structural complexity
by incorporating irregular barriers. The fourth setting is an
outdoor forest environment densely populated with trees of
varying geometries and textures, presenting significant vi-
sual diversity and occlusion. These environments provide a
gradient of perceptual and navigational difficulty. For a fair
comparison of sample efficiency, asymptotic performance, and
generalization, all methods, including OMC-RL and baselines,
are trained exclusively in the box-based environment and are
evaluated in the remaining scenes without fine-tuning.
B. Metrics
We evaluate the performance of our method using several
widely adopted metrics [52].
9
•Navigation Error (NE), defined as the average Euclidean
distance between the drone’s terminal position and the
goal (m).
•Oracle Success Rate (OS), which measures the percentage
of episodes where any location along the trajectory falls
within a fixed success thresholdεof0.5 mfrom the goal,
as specified in our setup (%).
•Success Rate (SR), defined as the percentage of episodes
in which the drone reaches the goal (%).
•Success weighted by Path Length (SPL), the primary
metric reflecting both task completion and navigation ef-
ficiency, calculated as SPL=1
MPM
i=1Ii·ℓi
max(d i,ℓi), where
Ii∈ {0,1}indicates success,ℓ iis the optimal path
length, andd iis the executed trajectory length.
•Collision Rate (CR), defined as the percentage of episodes
in which the drone collides with obstacles (%).
•Time to Success (TTS), defined as the average number of
steps taken in successful episodes.
Note that these metrics are applied exclusively in simula-
tion, where an episode is considered successful only if the
drone reaches the goal precisely. For real-world experiments,
only the success rate is reported, and an episode is deemed
successful if the drone arrives within a0.5 mradius of the
goal to ensure safety.
C. Baselines
To comprehensively validate the performance of OMC-RL,
we compare it with several representative baselines across RL
and traditional planning-based approaches.
•NPE [33]: An improved RL baseline that combines
non-optimal demonstrations IL to address the trade-off
between sample efficiency and asymptotic performance.
We use it to benchmark the effectiveness of our oracle-
guided IL formulation.
•CURL [25]: A classical contrastive RL framework that
learns compact visual representations by maximizing sim-
ilarity between augmented views of the same observation.
It relies mainly on local image augmentations and CNN
encoders without modeling temporal relationships.
•PPO [51]: A widely used model-free RL baseline. We
adopt its end-to-end variant that directly maps monocular
RGB inputs to continuous action commands without any
auxiliary supervision or representation pretraining.
•Hybrid APF [53]: A traditional path planning baseline
based on the artificial potential field (APF), augmented
with A* search to improve global feasibility. This method
represents classical non-learning approaches.
D. Parameter and Architecture Configuration
Upstream Masked Contrastive Representation Learning.
The encoder is trained using a batch size of32over sequences
of lengthT= 16, where each observationh tis formed by
stackingL= 3consecutive RGB frames. Each frame is ran-
domly cropped from224×224to192×192before being fed
into the encoder. The output latent representation dimension
isd= 384. We use a masking probabilityϱ m= 0.5, and setthe temperature coefficient in the contrastive loss of Eq. (5) to
τ= 0.07. The encoderf θand projection headφare optimized
using Adam with learning ratesλ θ=λφ= 1×10−3, while
the Transformer moduleξis trained with a separate learning
rateλ ξ= 2×10−3. A warm-up and inverse square root decay
schedule is applied to the Transformer for training stabiliza-
tion, with a warm-up horizon of 6000 steps. The architecture
details of the encoder, projection head, and Transformer are
provided in Section IV-B. The momentum coefficient used
to update the key encoder and key projection head is set to
m= 0.05.
Downstream Oracle-Guided Policy Learning.The RL
policy is optimized with a batch size of1024, buffer size
of10240, and a linearly decaying learning rate initialized at
3×10−4. The policy network consists of two fully connected
layers with256hidden units each, and layer normalization
is applied to all input features. The clipping parameter is set
toϵ= 0.2, and other hyperparameters follow the standard
PPO [51] style, including a GAE parameter of0.95, time
horizon of128, and three optimization epochs per iteration,
etc. The oracle-guided KL regularization coefficientαis
linearly annealed from0.95to0every10000steps, with the
scaling factorβfixed at1.0.
To encourage goal reaching, safety, and efficiency, the
reward function consists of three components. A terminal
reward of+10is given upon reaching the goal, while collisions
incur a penalty of−1. To discourage overly long trajecto-
ries, each action step receives a penalty of−1
Hmax, where
Hmax= 5000is the maximum episode length. Additionally,
a reward of0.1×(d init−dt)is applied at each timestep,
whered initandd trepresent the initial and current distances to
the goal, respectively. Note that all baselines adopt the same
DNN architecture asf θto ensure fair visual representation
capacity. For baselines involving overlapping training settings,
such as the feature encoder used in CURL [25], and the
RL optimization parameters in NPE [33], we apply identical
hyperparameter settings to ensure fair comparison.
VI. RESULTS ANDANALYSIS
This section presents the experimental results and key
analyses that validate the effectiveness of OMC-RL. We first
evaluate its performance across a series of simulated environ-
ments and compare it against various baselines. We then assess
its real-world generalizability through physical deployment on
a quadrotor platform. Finally, we conduct ablation studies to
examine the contribution of each core component.
A. Comparison Results in Simulation
All learning-based baselines are trained exclusively in the
box-based environment. Their reward curves during training
are illustrated in Fig. 4. After training, each baseline is eval-
uated in the remaining three environments without any fine-
tuning. In each environment, we conduct 200 testing episodes
to assess generalization. For the non-learning Hybrid APF, the
policy is directly applied to all evaluation scenarios. Note that
we refer to OMC-RL as Ours in all results.
10
0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Training Steps (×106)0246810Episode RewardOurs
NPE
CURL
PPO
Fig. 4: Training curves of episodic reward for all learning-
based baselines. All results are averaged over three random
seeds, with shaded regions indicating confidence intervals.
Oracle serves as an upper bound with the fastest convergence
and the highest asymptotic performance, while our method
achieves comparable results and consistently outperforms all
other baselines. NPE benefits from imitation of suboptimal
demonstrations, outperforming CURL in both sample effi-
ciency and asymptotic performance. PPO, as a vanilla baseline,
exhibits the weakest performance.
(1) Training Results.As shown in Fig. 4, our method
achieves the fastest convergence and strongest asymptotic
performance, consistently outperforming all baselines. This
advantage can be attributed to two key factors: (i) the visual
encoder is pretrained and frozen, which reduces training
instability and computational cost; and (ii) the introduction
of oracle guidance during early training is conducive to ac-
quiring informative priors, substantially accelerating learning.
Among the remaining baselines, NPE benefits from suboptimal
demonstrations that enhance initial exploration, but its reliance
on imperfect guidance ultimately limits overall performance.
CURL converges more slowly and achieves weaker asymptotic
performance compared to NPE. It also underperforms our
method, which can be attributed to its inability to model
temporal relationships across observations. PPO, as the vanilla
baseline, performs significantly inferior than all baselines.
(2) Evaluation Results.Quantitative results across all
metrics are summarized in Table I. The results show that our
method maintains consistently strong generalization across all
evaluation environments despite relying solely on sequences of
monocular RGB frames. This generalization capability stems
from two key design choices: (i) the pretrained and frozen
visual encoder facilitates feature transfer by learning gener-
alizable visual representations; and (ii) our method explicitly
models temporal relationships across sequential observations,
which are critical for visuomotor policy learning under partial
observability. In contrast, although CURL also follows a
pretrain-and-freeze paradigm, its focus on frame-wise repre-
sentation learning without temporal modeling limits its gen-
eralization, particularly in the outdoor environment with high
visual variability. NPE exhibits noticeable performance dropsin evaluation scenarios. This is expected, as IL approaches
inherently rely on prior demonstrations, making them prone to
overfitting and less adaptable to unseen settings. While NPE
partially alleviates this by transitioning from IL to exploration,
its end-to-end training setup with RGB observations, where
the encoder and policy are jointly optimized, still leads to
overfitting within the training domain. PPO, as the vanilla
RL baseline, performs the worst among all learning-based
methods. The Hybrid APF baseline demonstrates competitive
results in structured environments such as the furniture and tree
scenes. However, its reliance on hand-crafted potential fields
makes it susceptible to local minima, especially in irregular
barrier layouts. In such settings, potential field approximations
become unreliable, often resulting in unstable trajectories.
These results demonstrate that masked contrastive learning and
oracle guidance jointly enhance both navigation performance
and generalization to unseen environments.
Representative flight trajectories are visualized in Fig. 5,
further demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach. Our
method consistently outperforms all baselines across evalu-
ation scenarios, generating smooth and coherent flight tra-
jectories. This demonstrates the advantage of incorporating
oracle guidance, as leveraging complete environmental state
information enables the policy to perform more effective and
goal-directed maneuvers.
B. Real-World Experiments
To further evaluate the effectiveness and generalizability of
OMC-RL, we conduct real-world experiments in two indoor
environments. The real-world deployment setup is illustrated
in Fig. 6. The first is a simple indoor scene containing multiple
box-shaped obstacles with an identical appearance. The second
is a more complex setting that introduces additional perceptual
challenges, including potted plants and obstacles with diverse
textures and colors, which increase scene diversity and pose
greater sim-to-real domain shifts for visual perception. In
addition, to simulate abrupt illumination changes often en-
countered in real deployments, we manually switch ambient
lighting on and off during flight to test robustness against
visual perturbations. The drone used for testing is a DJI Tello
Edu, a lightweight quadrotor equipped with a forward-facing
monocular RGB camera that streams720pvideo at30FPS
and provides a field of view (FOV) of82.6◦. It receives
localization updates at120Hz via the OptiTrack motion
capture system. Start and goal positions are manually specified
before each flight. Obstacles are perceived using the onboard
RGB stream, which is resized and processed through the
pretrained feature encoder to extract compact representations.
These representations, along with other state information, are
then fed into the downstream policy network to generate
continuous control commands. The entire model is exported
in ONNX format and deployed for real-time inference without
extra fine-tuning.
We evaluate the model under 20 trials per environment,
across varying start-goal configurations. The method achieves
a success rate of70%in the normal scene,65%under
color variations, and55%under illumination disturbance. In
11
Ours NPE CURL Hybrid APF PPO
(a) Furniture environment
Ours NPE CURL Hybrid APF PPO (b) Barrier environment
Ours NPE CURL Hybrid APF PPO
 
 (c) Tree environment
Fig. 5: Qualitative trajectory comparisons of baselines in three evaluation environments. The results demonstrate that the oracle
and OMC-RL consistently generate smooth and efficient trajectories. In contrast, other baselines often produce suboptimal or
erratic trajectories and tend to fail in environments with irregular layouts and complex textures.
TABLE I: Performance of Baselines in Simulation Environments
MethodFurniture Scenario (Easy) Barrier Scenario (Medium) Tree Scenario (Hard)
NE↓OS↑SR↑SPL↑CR↓TTS↓NE↓OS↑SR↑SPL↑CR↓TTS↓NE↓OS↑SR↑SPL↑CR↓TTS↓
Ours1.49 92.5 91.5 0.88 2.5 502 1.62 86.0 84.5 0.80 5.5 525 2.01 80.5 78.5 0.73 8.0 516
NPE [33] 6.08 21.5 17.5 0.12 80.5 564 7.59 9.5 0.0 0.00 94.5 – 7.83 9.0 0.0 0.00 97.0 –
CURL [25] 2.07 75.0 72.5 0.68 22.0 589 5.07 34.0 30.0 0.26 62.0 603 7.36 12.0 0.0 0.00 79.5 –
PPO [51] 6.90 17.5 12.0 0.08 87.0 596 7.36 12.0 0.0 0.00 90.0 – 7.78 9.5 0.0 0.00 98.0 –
Hybrid APF [53] 2.56 73.5 72.0 0.69 7.0 741 5.23 31.0 28.5 0.25 17.5 789 3.04 71.5 69.5 0.66 10.5 753
*Bold values indicate the best results. “–” indicates zero success.
Marker
Propeller Guards
Motors Camera
AntennasBatteryPropellerAircraft Status Indicator
Vision Positioning System
GoalObstaclesOptiTrack
(b)(a)
Color Variation Illumination Change Normal Scenario
Fig. 6: Real-world deployment setup and evaluation scenarios. (a) Hardware components of the DJI Tello Edu platform and
schematic illustration of the indoor test environment. The drone is equipped with a monocular RGB camera and receives
localization updates from an OptiTrack motion capture system. (b) Three evaluation scenarios designed to assess robustness
under visual domain shifts: normal scenario with uniform obstacle appearance, color variation introducing obstacles with diverse
textures and colors, and illumination change induced by manually toggling ambient lighting conditions during flight.
12
Ours
CURLOurs Ours
CURL CURLColor Variation Illumination Change Normal Scenario
(a) Visual comparison of flight trajectories in three physical scenarios.
CURL Velocity [m/s] Ours Velocity [m/s]
(b) Velocity-annotated trajectories highlighting movement patterns of OMC-RL and CURL.
Fig. 7: Real-world trajectory evaluation under visual domain shifts. Our method consistently produces smooth and successful
trajectories across all scenarios, demonstrating strong robustness and generalization. In contrast, CURL frequently fails when
facing visual disturbances such as obstacle color variation, texture inconsistency, and sudden illumination shifts.
comparison, CURL only achieves45%in the normal scene
and fails entirely under color and illumination disturbances.
Flight trajectories for representative runs are visualized in
Fig. 7. Despite the presence of visual distractors such as
non-uniform obstacle textures, cluttered plant structures, and
sudden lighting changes, OMC-RL demonstrates robust and
generalizable performance. This validates the strength of our
masked contrastive learning framework, which enables the
encoder to focus on temporally coherent and task-relevant
representations rather than overfitting to domain-specific visual
patterns, thereby enhancing real-world transferability.
To further validate the effectiveness of OMC-RL in real-
world scenarios, we conduct qualitative analyses on visual
attention and feature consistency under various disturbances.
As illustrated in Fig. 8, we visualize the attention heatmaps
generated by OMC-RL and CURL using Grad-CAM [54]
across three physical scenarios. Compared to CURL, OMC-
RL consistently focuses on salient objects of interest, even in
the presence of color variations and illumination changes, in-
dicating improved robustness to perceptual noise and stronger
task awareness. We further assess the representation stabilityof OMC-RL by analyzing the encoder’s response to disturbed
inputs. Specifically, we collect FOV images from successful
trajectories and apply random changes in brightness and hue,
as well as random masking over inputs. These modified
observations are passed through the feature encoders of OMC-
RL and CURL, and the resulting features are projected using
t-SNE [55], as shown in Fig. 9. The features produced by
OMC-RL remain densely clustered and well-aligned with
those from the original inputs, indicating strong invariance and
continuity in its learned representations. In contrast, features
from CURL exhibit noticeable shift and dispersion under the
same conditions, reflecting higher sensitivity to domain shifts
and reduced generalization.
C. Ablation Studies
To better interpret the contributions of each component
in OMC-RL, we conduct a series of ablation studies and
analyses. Note that all ablation results are reported across
evaluation environments, as our primary focus lies in assessing
the model’s generalizability beyond the training domain.
13
Normal Color IlluminationCURL Ours Original
Fig. 8: Attention visualization using Grad-CAM [54] in phys-
ical environments. Our method consistently focuses on task-
relevant regions across normal, color-shifted, and illumination-
varied scenes, whereas CURL shows misplaced attention,
especially under visual disturbances.
Brightness Hue MaskCURL Ours
Fig. 9: t-SNE [55] visualization of learned features under input
disturbances. Our method maintains compact and consistent
feature clusters under brightness, hue, and masking conditions,
while CURL exhibits scattered and misaligned representations.
TABLE II: Ablation on Sequential Input for Contrastive
Representation Learning
Environment Method NE↓OS↑SR↑SPL↑CR↓TTS↓
Furniture (Easy)CURL2.07 75.0 72.5 0.68 22.0 589
CURL-cons 5.04 33.0 30.5 0.24 62.0 610
Barrier (Medium)CURL5.07 34.0 30.0 0.26 62.0 603
CURL-cons 7.09 14.5 0.0 0.00 84.0 –
Tree (Hard)CURL7.36 12.00.0 0.0079.5–
CURL-cons 7.97 7.5 0.0 0.00 89.5 –
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
_m
234567Value
NE 
Furniture
Barrier
Tree
N/A
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
_m
20406080Value
OS 
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
_m
020406080Value
SR 
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
_m
0.00.20.40.60.8Value
SPL 
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
_m
020406080Value
CR 
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
_m
500520540560580600Value
TTS 
Fig. 10: Ablation study on masking probabilityϱ m. We
evaluate downstream navigation performance with encoders
pretrained under different masking probabilities. Navigation
metrics are visualized as line plots across three simulation
environments. A masking ratio (ϱ m= 0.5) achieves the
best overall performance. In contrast, overly low or high
values lead to performance degradation due to insufficient
use of the Transformer’s reconstruction capability or excessive
information loss.
(1) Masking Probability.We investigate the impact of
varying the masking probabilityϱ mon downstream navigation
performance. Specifically, we pretrain separate encoders under
differentϱ m∈ {0.1,0.3,0.5,0.7,0.9}, and pair each
encoder with a newly initialized policy network trained in
the box-based environment. The resulting policies are then
tested in evaluation environments. The corresponding metrics
are summarized in Fig. 10. As shown, settingϱ m= 0.5
achieves the best overall performance. A high masking ra-
tio (e.g.,ϱ m= 0.9orϱ m= 0.7) leads to a significant
performance drop, even underperforming CURL, as excessive
masking removes most spatial and semantic cues from the
input, impairing the model’s ability to infer latent structure
and recover useful features from corrupted inputs. Similarly,
a low masking ratio (e.g.,ϱ m= 0.1orϱ m= 0.3) also
hampers generalization. According to Eq. (5), insufficient
masked positions result in sparse training signals, making
it difficult for the model to learn useful temporal correla-
tions and reconstruct representations. These results confirm
the utility of our masked contrastive learning framework.
Properly tuned masking probability encourages the encoder
14
to extract consistent and temporally predictive features, while
both under-masking and over-masking degrade downstream
navigation performance due to insufficient supervisory signals
or excessive information loss.
Fig. 11: Ablation study on the Transformer module design. We
compare our setup (Transformer on query encoder only) with
a dual-Transformer variant where both query and key encoders
use Transformers. Radar plots visualize normalized navigation
metrics, where higher values indicate better performance. The
dual-Transformer design degrades performance due to over-
reliance on temporal modeling, weakening the CNN encoder’s
standalone capability during downstream policy learning.
(2) Sequential InputIn our method,Ttemporally con-
secutive frames are sampled fromHand processed by the
Transformer, where contrastive pairs are constructed through
masking. In contrast, CURL forms contrastive pairs by aug-
menting individual frames independently sampled from the
dataset. To investigate the effect of sequential input, we modify
CURL to operate on consecutive frames rather than random
ones, denoted as CURL-cons. Empirically, we observe that
training CURL-cons with high-frequency sequential frames
leads to severe instability and even encoder collapse. Lowering
the sampling frequency improves training stability but still
results in significantly degraded policy performance, as shown
in Table II. These findings suggest that simply applying
sequential input to CURL introduces visually redundant and
highly correlated features that are difficult to differentiate
using basic data augmentations, thereby limiting the effective-
ness of contrastive learning and downstream generalization.
The results further confirm that the performance gains of our
method are not solely due to temporal continuity, but also
depend on the use of masking during sequence modeling.
(3) Transformer Module.Our method adopts an asymmet-
ric design in which only the query encoder is equipped with
a Transformer module, while the key branch remains purely
convolutional. Although this avoids additional computational
overhead, we further investigate whether this asymmetry is
indeed beneficial through a targeted ablation. We introduce
an additional Transformer moduleξ kfor the key encoder,
denoted as our-dualT. The parameters are updated using mo-
mentum contrastive learning following the paradigm in Section
IV-B. As shown in Fig. 11, this design leads to a drop in
performance. We attribute this to a mismatch between the
contrastive learning objective and downstream usage: during
policy learning, only the CNN encoder output is used to
generate actions without the Transformer module. Introducing
temporal modeling on both branches of masked contrastive
Furniture Barrier Tree
Scenario01234567ValueNE 
Ours
Ours w/o 
CURL
CURL w/ 
N/A
Furniture Barrier Tree
Scenario020406080ValueOS 
Furniture Barrier Tree
Scenario020406080ValueSR 
Furniture Barrier Tree
Scenario0.00.20.40.60.8ValueSPL 
Furniture Barrier Tree
Scenario01020304050607080ValueCR 
Furniture Barrier Tree
Scenario0100200300400500600ValueTTS 
Fig. 12: Ablation study on the non-linear projection module
φ. We visualize downstream navigation performance using bar
plots. Results demonstrate that removing the projection head
leads to consistent degradation compared to the full model.
While addingφto CURL improves its performance, both
CURL variants remain inferior to our approach. These results
highlight the importance ofφin learning representations.
learning encourages the model to rely heavily on the Trans-
former layers, thereby weakening the CNN encoder’s ability
to encode temporal dependencies independently. This limits
the utility of the learned representations once the Transformer
is removed, and ultimately impairs policy generalization.
(4) Non-Projection Module.Our method includes a non-
linear projection moduleφprior to the contrastive loss. To
assess its contribution to visuomotor policy learning, we con-
duct an ablation in whichφis removed while keeping all other
components unchanged, denoted as ours w/oφ. The evaluation
results, shown in Fig. 12, indicate that removingφleads
to degraded policy performance. This probably stems from
the reduced representational capacity of the feature encoder,
as direct optimization without non-linear transformation can
restrict the encoder from producing discriminative embeddings
better for policy learning. While ours w/oφunderperforms
the full model, it still exceeds our CURL baseline. Note that
the vanilla CURL does not include the non-linear projection
module. Here, a CURL variant incorporatingφis used and de-
noted as CURL w/φ, as explained in Section V-C. To further
examine the effect ofφ, we compare both CURL variants and
observe that adding the projection head consistently improves
performance. All aforementioned findings are aligned with the
conclusion reported in [22]. However, both CURL variants
15
NE OS SR SPL CR TTS
Ours
Ours w/o OT
NPE
NPE w/ OT0.85 0.93 0.92 0.88 0.97 0.65
0.85 0.90 0.87 0.83 0.92 0.53
0.39 0.21 0.17 0.12 0.19 0.24
0.44 0.29 0.27 0.18 0.25 0.32Furniture
NE OS SR SPL CR TTS
Ours
Ours w/o OT
NPE
NPE w/ OT0.84 0.86 0.84 0.80 0.94 0.50
0.80 0.74 0.71 0.65 0.83 0.35
0.24 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.06 N/A
0.30 0.16 0.07 0.04 0.11 N/ABarrier
NE OS SR SPL CR TTS
Ours
Ours w/o OT
NPE
NPE w/ OT0.80 0.81 0.79 0.73 0.92 0.56
0.65 0.65 0.62 0.54 0.80 0.45
0.22 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.03 N/A
0.29 0.17 0.00 0.00 0.06 N/ATree
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Normalized Performance (0=Worst, 1=Best)
Fig. 13: Ablation Study on Oracle Teacher (OT). The heatmap visualizes the normalized performance of all metrics, where
higher values indicate better performance. Removing the oracle teacher leads to moderate drops in the furniture scene, but
causes significant degradation in more complex settings. This highlights the oracle’s contribution in guiding policy training.
Adding OT to the NPE baseline yields improvements over NPE, but still falls short of our method. These results highlight the
benefit of oracle guidance for learning effective policies.
TABLE III: Ablation on Decay Strategies for Downstream Policy Learning
MethodFurniture Scenario (Easy) Barrier Scenario (Medium) Tree Scenario (Hard)
NE↓OS↑SR↑SPL↑CR↓TTS↓NE↓OS↑SR↑SPL↑CR↓TTS↓NE↓OS↑SR↑SPL↑CR↓TTS↓
Ours1.49 92.5 91.5 0.88 2.5 502 1.62 86.0 84.5 0.80 5.5 525 2.01 80.5 78.5 0.73 8.0 516
Ours-fixed 1.77 84.5 81.5 0.75 6.5 517 1.84 79.0 76.0 0.69 9.5 538 2.69 72.5 71.0 0.63 14.0 528
Ours-exp 1.65 87.0 84.5 0.77 5.5 512 1.90 81.0 78.5 0.71 8.0 533 2.56 75.5 72.5 0.65 13.0 524
remain inferior to our proposed method. These results support
the utility of the non-linear projection moduleφand further
highlight the role of masking and temporal correlation in
learning transferable visuomotor representations.
(5) Oracle Teacher.In our method, an oracle teacher policy
with access to full global state information is introduced
to guide the early stage of downstream policy training. To
evaluate the effectiveness of this guidance, we implement an
ablation variant in which the oracle guidance is removed,
denoted as our w/o OT. Furthermore, we replace the non-
expert policy in the NPE baseline with the oracle teacher,
denoted as NPE w/ OT. As summarized in Fig. 13, our w/o OT
results in only a slight performance drop in the easy furniture
environment. However, its performance degrades significantly
in the more challenging barrier and tree settings. This demon-
strates the importance of the oracle teacher, which leverages
privileged information to generate ideal action commands.
In mediated environments, the agent can still compensate
through environmental exploration. However, as the scene
becomes more complex and the visual appearance becomes
more diverse and perceptually demanding, the absence of
oracle guidance leads to more noticeable performance degra-
dation. Results also show that NPE w/ OT outperforms the
original NPE but remains inferior to both our w/o OT and
our full model. These findings further confirm the benefit of
oracle guidance and emphasize the significance of learning
generalized representations for visuomotor policy learning.
(6) Decay Schedule.In our method, a decaying coefficient
αis introduced in Eq. (9) to balance the RL objective and
the KL divergence term. This coefficient is linearly annealed
throughout training, allowing the policy to gradually transi-tion from imitating the oracle to exploring the environment
independently. To assess the impact of the decay schedule,
we compare three variants: a fixed coefficient setting (denoted
as our-fixed), an exponential decay setting (our-exp), and our
proposed linear decay schedule. For our-exp,αis decayed by
a factor of0.95every1000steps. As shown in Table III, the
linear decay consistently outperforms the other two variants.
Our-fixed prevents the agent from sufficiently reducing its
reliance on the oracle, thereby limiting late-stage exploration.
Our-exp reducesαtoo rapidly in the early stage, resulting in
insufficient imitation and limiting the agent’s ability to acquire
meaningful guidance. In the later stage, the decay slows down
excessively, hindering the agent’s shift toward independent
exploration. The linear schedule, by contrast, enables a smooth
and progressive shift from imitation to exploration, facilitating
better policy adaptation across environments.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this work, we propose OMC-RL, a novel framework
that combines masked contrastive learning with oracle-guided
RL to improve the sample efficiency and asymptotic per-
formance of visuomotor policies for drones. OMC-RL de-
couples upstream representation learning from downstream
policy learning. For upstream, a Transformer-integrated mod-
ule combining sequence modeling and masked contrastive
learning is employed to extract temporally-aware and task-
relevant representations from sequential visual inputs. After
training, the Transformer component is discarded, while the
visual encoder is frozen and used for downstream policy
learning. During this stage, an oracle teacher policy, which
has access to full global state information, supervises the
16
agent in the early stage and gradually reduces its impact as
the agent transitions to independent exploration. Extensive
experiments in both simulated and real-world environments
demonstrate that OMC-RL effectively improves sample ef-
ficiency and asymptotic performance. Moreover, it enhances
policy generalization under various and challenging perceptual
conditions. In future work, we plan to extend OMC-RL to
other robotic vision tasks. Owing to its decoupled training of
the feature encoder, the framework can capture task-agnostic
visual features that support the learning of transferable policies
across diverse settings. Another promising direction is to
extend OMC-RL to multi-modal or instruction-guided policy
learning scenarios, where grounding visual observations to
semantic goals remains a major challenge.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Wu, Y . Zhou, H. Yang, Z. Huang, and C. Lv, “Human-guided
reinforcement learning with sim-to-real transfer for autonomous naviga-
tion,”IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 14 745–14 759, 2023.
[2] X. He, J. Wu, Z. Huang, Z. Hu, J. Wang, A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, and
C. Lv, “Fear-neuro-inspired reinforcement learning for safe autonomous
driving,”IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 267–279, 2023.
[3] N. Ye, Z. Zeng, J. Zhou, L. Zhu, Y . Duan, Y . Wu, J. Wu, H. Zeng,
Q. Gu, X. Wanget al., “Ood-control: generalizing control in unseen
environments,”IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 7421–7433, 2024.
[4] J. Xiao, R. Zhang, Y . Zhang, and M. Feroskhan, “Vision-based learning
for drones: A survey,”IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
Learning Systems, 2025.
[5] R. Jin, Y . Gao, Y . Wang, Y . Wu, H. Lu, C. Xu, and F. Gao, “Gs-
planner: A gaussian-splatting-based planning framework for active high-
fidelity reconstruction,” in2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2024, pp. 11 202–11 209.
[6] K. Xu, Y . Hao, S. Yuan, C. Wang, and L. Xie, “Airslam: An efficient and
illumination-robust point-line visual slam system,”IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, 2025.
[7] L. Wang, L. Ge, S. Luo, Z. Yan, Z. Cui, and J. Feng, “Tc-sfm: Robust
track-community-based structure-from-motion,”IEEE Transactions on
Image Processing, vol. 33, pp. 1534–1548, 2024.
[8] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” inProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016, pp. 770–778.
[9] A. Loquercio, A. I. Maqueda, C. R. Del-Blanco, and D. Scaramuzza,
“Dronet: Learning to fly by driving,”IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 1088–1095, 2018.
[10] D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, M. Lai, A. Guez,
M. Lanctot, L. Sifre, D. Kumaran, T. Graepelet al., “A general
reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go
through self-play,”Science, vol. 362, no. 6419, pp. 1140–1144, 2018.
[11] O. Vinyals, I. Babuschkin, W. M. Czarnecki, M. Mathieu, A. Dudzik,
J. Chung, D. H. Choi, R. Powell, T. Ewalds, P. Georgievet al., “Grand-
master level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning,”
Nature, vol. 575, no. 7782, pp. 350–354, 2019.
[12] J. Li, S. Koyamada, Q. Ye, G. Liu, C. Wang, R. Yang, L. Zhao,
T. Qin, T.-Y . Liu, and H.-W. Hon, “Suphx: Mastering mahjong with
deep reinforcement learning,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13590, 2020.
[13] E. Kaufmann, L. Bauersfeld, A. Loquercio, M. M ¨uller, V . Koltun, and
D. Scaramuzza, “Champion-level drone racing using deep reinforcement
learning,”Nature, vol. 620, no. 7976, pp. 982–987, 2023.
[14] J. Xiao and M. Feroskhan, “Learning multi-pursuit evasion for safe tar-
geted navigation of drones,”IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence,
2024.
[15] C. Yan, Y . Sun, Y . Jiang, X. Xiang, and M. Chen, “Selective imitation
enhanced deep reinforcement learning for aav navigation and obstacle
avoidance with sparse rewards,”IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems, 2025.
[16] D. Yarats, A. Zhang, I. Kostrikov, B. Amos, J. Pineau, and R. Fergus,
“Improving sample efficiency in model-free reinforcement learning
from images,” inProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI), vol. 35, no. 12, 2021, pp. 10 674–10 681.[17] D. Yarats, R. Fergus, A. Lazaric, and L. Pinto, “Reinforcement learn-
ing with prototypical representations,” inInternational Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML). PMLR, 2021, pp. 11 920–11 931.
[18] S. Yoo, S. Jung, Y . Lee, D. Shim, and H. J. Kim, “Mono-camera-
only target chasing for a drone in a dense environment by cross-modal
learning,”IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
[19] M. Zhang, S. Vikram, L. Smith, P. Abbeel, M. Johnson, and S. Levine,
“Solar: Deep structured representations for model-based reinforcement
learning,” inInternational Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
PMLR, 2019, pp. 7444–7453.
[20] A. X. Lee, A. Nagabandi, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Stochastic latent
actor-critic: Deep reinforcement learning with a latent variable model,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 33,
pp. 741–752, 2020.
[21] J. Zhao, Y . Wang, Z. Cai, N. Liu, K. Wu, and Y . Wang, “Learning visual
representation for autonomous drone navigation via a contrastive world
model,”IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 5, no. 3, pp.
1263–1276, 2023.
[22] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” inInternational
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). PMLR, 2020, pp. 1597–
1607.
[23] Z. Jiang, T. Chen, T. Chen, and Z. Wang, “Improving contrastive learning
on imbalanced data via open-world sampling,”Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 34, pp. 5997–6009,
2021.
[24] Y . Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Li, R. C. Qiu, H. Xu, and Q. Tian, “Semi-
supervised contrastive learning with similarity co-calibration,”IEEE
Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 25, pp. 1749–1759, 2022.
[25] M. Laskin, A. Srinivas, and P. Abbeel, “Curl: Contrastive unsupervised
representations for reinforcement learning,” inInternational Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML). PMLR, 2020, pp. 5639–5650.
[26] Y . Zhang, J. Xiao, and M. Feroskhan, “Learning cross-modal visuo-
motor policies for autonomous drone navigation,”IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, 2025.
[27] J. Xing, L. Bauersfeld, Y . Song, C. Xing, and D. Scaramuzza, “Con-
trastive learning for enhancing robust scene transfer in vision-based
agile flight,” in2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2024, pp. 5330–5337.
[28] J. Fu, Y . Song, Y . Wu, F. Yu, and D. Scaramuzza, “Learning deep
sensorimotor policies for vision-based autonomous drone racing,” in
2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2023, pp. 5243–5250.
[29] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,”Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 30, 2017.
[30] D. Gandhi, L. Pinto, and A. Gupta, “Learning to fly by crashing,” in2017
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, 2017, pp. 3948–3955.
[31] A. Kouris and C.-S. Bouganis, “Learning to fly by myself: A self-
supervised cnn-based approach for autonomous navigation,” in2018
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–9.
[32] Y . Zhang, Y . Hu, Y . Song, D. Zou, and W. Lin, “Learning vision-based
agile flight via differentiable physics,”Nature Machine Intelligence, pp.
1–13, 2025.
[33] Y . Zhang, C. Yan, J. Xiao, and M. Feroskhan, “Npe-drl: Enhancing
perception constrained obstacle avoidance with non-expert policy guided
reinforcement learning,”IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence,
2024.
[34] J. Xiao, P. Pisutsin, and M. Feroskhan, “Collaborative target search with
a visual drone swarm: An adaptive curriculum embedded multistage re-
inforcement learning approach,”IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems, 2023.
[35] C. Yan, C. Wang, X. Xiang, K. H. Low, X. Wang, X. Xu, and
L. Shen, “Collision-avoiding flocking with multiple fixed-wing uavs
in obstacle-cluttered environments: A task-specific curriculum-based
madrl approach,”IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems, 2023.
[36] R. Bonatti, R. Madaan, V . Vineet, S. Scherer, and A. Kapoor, “Learning
visuomotor policies for aerial navigation using cross-modal representa-
tions,” in2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1637–1644.
[37] E. Kargar and V . Kyrki, “Increasing the efficiency of policy learning
for autonomous vehicles by multi-task representation learning,”IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 701–710, 2022.
17
[38] J. C. de Jesus, V . A. Kich, A. H. Kolling, R. B. Grando, R. S. Guerra,
and P. L. Drews, “Depth-cuprl: Depth-imaged contrastive unsupervised
prioritized representations in reinforcement learning for mapless navi-
gation of unmanned aerial vehicles,” in2022 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2022, pp.
10 579–10 586.
[39] J. Jiang, Y . Yang, Y . Deng, C. Ma, and J. Zhang, “Bevnav: Robot au-
tonomous navigation via spatial-temporal contrastive learning in bird’s-
eye view,”IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
[40] J. Zhang, J. Kim, B. O’Donoghue, and S. Boyd, “Sample efficient
reinforcement learning with reinforce,” inProceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), vol. 35, no. 12, 2021, pp.
10 887–10 895.
[41] D. Yarats, I. Kostrikov, and R. Fergus, “Image augmentation is all
you need: Regularizing deep reinforcement learning from pixels,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
[42] M. Laskin, K. Lee, A. Stooke, L. Pinto, P. Abbeel, and A. Srinivas,
“Reinforcement learning with augmented data,”Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 33, pp. 19 884–19 895,
2020.
[43] T. Hester, M. Vecerik, O. Pietquin, M. Lanctot, T. Schaul, B. Piot,
D. Horgan, J. Quan, A. Sendonaris, I. Osbandet al., “Deep q-learning
from demonstrations,” inProceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), vol. 32, no. 1, 2018.
[44] W. Huang, H. Liu, Z. Huang, and C. Lv, “Safety-aware human-in-
the-loop reinforcement learning with shared control for autonomous
driving,”IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2024.
[45] A. Stooke, K. Lee, P. Abbeel, and M. Laskin, “Decoupling representation
learning from reinforcement learning,” inInternational Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML). PMLR, 2021, pp. 9870–9879.
[46] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (NAACL-HLT), 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[47] Y . Cui, W. Che, T. Liu, B. Qin, and Z. Yang, “Pre-training with whole
word masking for chinese bert,”IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 29, pp. 3504–3514, 2021.
[48] K. He, H. Fan, Y . Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast
for unsupervised visual representation learning,” inProceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[49] V . Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski
et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,”
Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.
[50] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Off-
policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic
actor,” inInternational Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). Pmlr,
2018, pp. 1861–1870.
[51] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Prox-
imal policy optimization algorithms,”arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347,
2017.
[52] P. Anderson, Q. Wu, D. Teney, J. Bruce, M. Johnson, N. S ¨underhauf,
I. Reid, S. Gould, and A. Van Den Hengel, “Vision-and-language
navigation: Interpreting visually-grounded navigation instructions in real
environments,” inProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018, pp. 3674–3683.
[53] Z. Pan, C. Zhang, Y . Xia, H. Xiong, and X. Shao, “An improved
artificial potential field method for path planning and formation control
of the multi-uav systems,”IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems
II: Express Briefs, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 1129–1133, 2021.
[54] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra, “Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via
gradient-based localization,” inProceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017, pp. 618–626.
[55] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-sne.”Journal
of Machine Learning Research, vol. 9, no. 11, 2008.
Yuhang Zhang(graduate student member, IEEE)
received the B.E. degree in flight vehicle propulsion
engineering from Harbin Engineering University,
Harbin, China, in 2021 and the M.Eng. degree from
the School of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering
at Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singa-
pore, in 2023. Currently, he is pursuing his Ph.D.
degree at the School of Mechanical & Aerospace
Engineering at NTU, Singapore.
His research primarily focuses on unmanned
aerial vehicles, deep reinforcement learning, and
vision-and-language navigation.
Jiaping Xiao(graduate student member, IEEE) re-
ceived the B.E. degree in aircraft design and en-
gineering and the M.S. degree in flight dynamics
and control from Beihang University, Beijing, China,
in 2014 and 2017, and the Ph.D. degree in intelli-
gent systems from Nanyang Technological Univer-
sity (NTU), Singapore, in 2024. He is currently a
research fellow with the School of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, NTU.
His research interests include cyber-physical sys-
tems, reinforcement learning, machine vision, and
aerial robotics.
Chao Yan(member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree
in electrical engineering and automation from China
University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou,
China, in 2017, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
control science and engineering from the National
University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China,
in 2019, and 2023, respectively. He was a visit-
ing Ph.D. student with the School of Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore, from 2021 to 2022.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
College of Automation Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Nanjing, China. His research interests include deep reinforce-
ment learning and coordination control of UA V swarms.
Mir Feroskhan(member, IEEE) received B.E. de-
gree (Hons.) in aerospace engineering from Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore, in 2011, and
the Ph.D. degree in aerospace engineering from the
Florida Institute of Technology, Melbourne, FL, in
2016. He is currently an assistant professor with the
School of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering at
NTU.
His research interests include nonlinear control
systems, multi-agent systems, flight dynamics and
control, and aerial robotics.
